The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Journal of the Plague Year, by Daniel Defoe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title:  A Journal of the Plague Year

Author: Daniel Defoe

Release Date: December, 1995 [EBook #376]
[Most recently updated: April 3, 2020]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A JOURNAL OF THE PLAGUE YEAR ***




Text file produced by Tokuya Matsumoto

HTML file produced by David Widger

[Illustration]




A Journal of the Plague Year

by Daniel Defoe


      being Observations or Memorials
      of the most remarkable occurrences,
      as well public as_ private, which happened in London
      during the last great visitation in 1665.
       Written by a CITIZEN who continued
      all the while in London_.
      Never made publick before


      It was about the beginning of September, 1664, that I, among the
      rest of my neighbours, heard in ordinary discourse that the
      plague was returned again in Holland; for it had been very
      violent there, and particularly at Amsterdam and Rotterdam, in
      the year 1663, whither, they say, it was brought, some said from
      Italy, others from the Levant, among some goods which were
      brought home by their Turkey fleet; others said it was brought
      from Candia; others from Cyprus. It mattered not from whence it
      came; but all agreed it was come into Holland again.

      We had no such thing as printed newspapers in those days to
      spread rumours and reports of things, and to improve them by the
      invention of men, as I have lived to see practised since. But
      such things as these were gathered from the letters of merchants
      and others who corresponded abroad, and from them was handed
      about by word of mouth only; so that things did not spread
      instantly over the whole nation, as they do now. But it seems
      that the Government had a true account of it, and several
      councils were held about ways to prevent its coming over; but all
      was kept very private. Hence it was that this rumour died off
      again, and people began to forget it as a thing we were very
      little concerned in, and that we hoped was not true; till the
      latter end of November or the beginning of December 1664 when two
      men, said to be Frenchmen, died of the plague in Long Acre, or
      rather at the upper end of Drury Lane. The family they were in
      endeavoured to conceal it as much as possible, but as it had
      gotten some vent in the discourse of the neighbourhood, the
      Secretaries of State got knowledge of it; and concerning
      themselves to inquire about it, in order to be certain of the
      truth, two physicians and a surgeon were ordered to go to the
      house and make inspection. This they did; and finding evident
      tokens of the sickness upon both the bodies that were dead, they
      gave their opinions publicly that they died of the plague.
      Whereupon it was given in to the parish clerk, and he also
      returned them to the Hall; and it was printed in the weekly bill
      of mortality in the usual manner, thus—

     Plague, 2. Parishes infected, 1.


      The people showed a great concern at this, and began to be
      alarmed all over the town, and the more, because in the last week
      in December 1664 another man died in the same house, and of the
      same distemper. And then we were easy again for about six weeks,
      when none having died with any marks of infection, it was said
      the distemper was gone; but after that, I think it was about the
      12th of February, another died in another house, but in the same
      parish and in the same manner.

      This turned the people’s eyes pretty much towards that end of the
      town, and the weekly bills showing an increase of burials in St
      Giles’s parish more than usual, it began to be suspected that the
      plague was among the people at that end of the town, and that
      many had died of it, though they had taken care to keep it as
      much from the knowledge of the public as possible. This possessed
      the heads of the people very much, and few cared to go through
      Drury Lane, or the other streets suspected, unless they had
      extraordinary business that obliged them to it

      This increase of the bills stood thus: the usual number of
      burials in a week, in the parishes of St Giles-in-the-Fields and
      St Andrew’s, Holborn, were from twelve to seventeen or nineteen
      each, few more or less; but from the time that the plague first
      began in St Giles’s parish, it was observed that the ordinary
      burials increased in number considerably. For example:—

From December 27 to January 3  { St Giles’s      16
     ”                              { St Andrew’s     17

     ”     January 3  ”    ”    10  { St Giles’s      12
     ”                              { St Andrew’s     25

     ”     January 10 ”    ”    17  { St Giles’s      18
     ”                              { St Andrew’s     28

     ”     January 17 ”    ”    24  { St Giles’s      23
     ”                              { St Andrew’s     16

     ”     January 24 ”    ”    31  { St Giles’s      24
     ”                              { St Andrew’s     15

     ”     January 30 ” February 7  { St Giles’s      21
     ”                              { St Andrew’s     23

     ”     February 7 ”     ”   14  { St Giles’s      24

      The like increase of the bills was observed in the parishes of St
      Bride’s, adjoining on one side of Holborn parish, and in the
      parish of St James, Clerkenwell, adjoining on the other side of
      Holborn; in both which parishes the usual numbers that died
      weekly were from four to six or eight, whereas at that time they
      were increased as follows:—

From December 20 to December 27  { St Bride’s     0
     ”                                { St James’s     8

     ”    December 27 to January   3  { St Bride’s     6
     ”                                { St James’s     9

     ”    January  3  ”    ”      10  { St Bride’s    11
     ”                                { St James’s     7

     ”    January 10  ”    ”      17  { St Bride’s    12
     ”                                { St James’s     9

     ”    January 17  ”    ”      24  { St Bride’s     9
     ”                                { St James’s    15

     ”    January 24  ”    ”      31  { St Bride’s     8
     ”                                { St James’s    12

     ”    January 31  ” February   7  { St Bride’s    13
     ”                                { St James’s     5

     ”    February 7  ”    ”      14  { St Bride’s     12
     ”                                { St James’s     6
      Besides this, it was observed with great uneasiness by the people
      that the weekly bills in general increased very much during these
      weeks, although it was at a time of the year when usually the
      bills are very moderate.

      The usual number of burials within the bills of mortality for a
      week was from about 240 or thereabouts to 300. The last was
      esteemed a pretty high bill; but after this we found the bills
      successively increasing as follows:—

 Buried.  Increased.
     December the 20th to the 27th               291       ...
     ”     ”      27th  ”     3rd January        349        58
     January  the  3rd  ”    10th   ”            394        45
     ”     ”      10th  ”    17th   ”            415        21
     ”     ”      17th  ”    24th   ”            474        59

      This last bill was really frightful, being a higher number than
      had been known to have been buried in one week since the
      preceding visitation of 1656.

      However, all this went off again, and the weather proving cold,
      and the frost, which began in December, still continuing very
      severe even till near the end of February, attended with sharp
      though moderate winds, the bills decreased again, and the city
      grew healthy, and everybody began to look upon the danger as good
      as over; only that still the burials in St Giles’s continued
      high. From the beginning of April especially they stood at
      twenty-five each week, till the week from the 18th to the 25th,
      when there was buried in St Giles’s parish thirty, whereof two of
      the plague and eight of the spotted-fever, which was looked upon
      as the same thing; likewise the number that died of the
      spotted-fever in the whole increased, being eight the week
      before, and twelve the week above-named.

      This alarmed us all again, and terrible apprehensions were among
      the people, especially the weather being now changed and growing
      warm, and the summer being at hand. However, the next week there
      seemed to be some hopes again; the bills were low, the number of
      the dead in all was but 388, there was none of the plague, and
      but four of the spotted-fever.

      But the following week it returned again, and the distemper was
      spread into two or three other parishes, viz., St Andrew’s,
      Holborn; St Clement Danes; and, to the great affliction of the
      city, one died within the walls, in the parish of St Mary
      Woolchurch, that is to say, in Bearbinder Lane, near Stocks
      Market; in all there were nine of the plague and six of the
      spotted-fever. It was, however, upon inquiry found that this
      Frenchman who died in Bearbinder Lane was one who, having lived
      in Long Acre, near the infected houses, had removed for fear of
      the distemper, not knowing that he was already infected.

      This was the beginning of May, yet the weather was temperate,
      variable, and cool enough, and people had still some hopes. That
      which encouraged them was that the city was healthy: the whole
      ninety-seven parishes buried but fifty-four, and we began to hope
      that, as it was chiefly among the people at that end of the town,
      it might go no farther; and the rather, because the next week,
      which was from the 9th of May to the 16th, there died but three,
      of which not one within the whole city or liberties; and St
      Andrew’s buried but fifteen, which was very low. ’Tis true St
      Giles’s buried two-and-thirty, but still, as there was but one of
      the plague, people began to be easy. The whole bill also was very
      low, for the week before the bill was but 347, and the week above
      mentioned but 343. We continued in these hopes for a few days,
      but it was but for a few, for the people were no more to be
      deceived thus; they searched the houses and found that the plague
      was really spread every way, and that many died of it every day.
      So that now all our extenuations abated, and it was no more to be
      concealed; nay, it quickly appeared that the infection had spread
      itself beyond all hopes of abatement. That in the parish of St
      Giles it was gotten into several streets, and several families
      lay all sick together; and, accordingly, in the weekly bill for
      the next week the thing began to show itself. There was indeed
      but fourteen set down of the plague, but this was all knavery and
      collusion, for in St Giles’s parish they buried forty in all,
      whereof it was certain most of them died of the plague, though
      they were set down of other distempers; and though the number of
      all the burials were not increased above thirty-two, and the
      whole bill being but 385, yet there was fourteen of the
      spotted-fever, as well as fourteen of the plague; and we took it
      for granted upon the whole that there were fifty died that week
      of the plague.

      The next bill was from the 23rd of May to the 30th, when the
      number of the plague was seventeen. But the burials in St Giles’s
      were fifty-three—a frightful number!—of whom they set down but
      nine of the plague; but on an examination more strictly by the
      justices of peace, and at the Lord Mayor’s request, it was found
      there were twenty more who were really dead of the plague in that
      parish, but had been set down of the spotted-fever or other
      distempers, besides others concealed.

      But those were trifling things to what followed immediately
      after; for now the weather set in hot, and from the first week in
      June the infection spread in a dreadful manner, and the bills
      rose high; the articles of the fever, spotted-fever, and teeth
      began to swell; for all that could conceal their distempers did
      it, to prevent their neighbours shunning and refusing to converse
      with them, and also to prevent authority shutting up their
      houses; which, though it was not yet practised, yet was
      threatened, and people were extremely terrified at the thoughts
      of it.

      The second week in June, the parish of St Giles, where still the
      weight of the infection lay, buried 120, whereof though the bills
      said but sixty-eight of the plague, everybody said there had been
      100 at least, calculating it from the usual number of funerals in
      that parish, as above.

      Till this week the city continued free, there having never any
      died, except that one Frenchman whom I mentioned before, within
      the whole ninety-seven parishes. Now there died four within the
      city, one in Wood Street, one in Fenchurch Street, and two in
      Crooked Lane. Southwark was entirely free, having not one yet
      died on that side of the water.

      I lived without Aldgate, about midway between Aldgate Church and
      Whitechappel Bars, on the left hand or north side of the street;
      and as the distemper had not reached to that side of the city,
      our neighbourhood continued very easy. But at the other end of
      the town their consternation was very great: and the richer sort
      of people, especially the nobility and gentry from the west part
      of the city, thronged out of town with their families and
      servants in an unusual manner; and this was more particularly
      seen in Whitechappel; that is to say, the Broad Street where I
      lived; indeed, nothing was to be seen but waggons and carts, with
      goods, women, servants, children, &c.; coaches filled with people
      of the better sort and horsemen attending them, and all hurrying
      away; then empty waggons and carts appeared, and spare horses
      with servants, who, it was apparent, were returning or sent from
      the countries to fetch more people; besides innumerable numbers
      of men on horseback, some alone, others with servants, and,
      generally speaking, all loaded with baggage and fitted out for
      travelling, as anyone might perceive by their appearance.

      This was a very terrible and melancholy thing to see, and as it
      was a sight which I could not but look on from morning to night
      (for indeed there was nothing else of moment to be seen), it
      filled me with very serious thoughts of the misery that was
      coming upon the city, and the unhappy condition of those that
      would be left in it.

      This hurry of the people was such for some weeks that there was
      no getting at the Lord Mayor’s door without exceeding difficulty;
      there were such pressing and crowding there to get passes and
      certificates of health for such as travelled abroad, for without
      these there was no being admitted to pass through the towns upon
      the road, or to lodge in any inn. Now, as there had none died in
      the city for all this time, my Lord Mayor gave certificates of
      health without any difficulty to all those who lived in the
      ninety-seven parishes, and to those within the liberties too for
      a while.

      This hurry, I say, continued some weeks, that is to say, all the
      month of May and June, and the more because it was rumoured that
      an order of the Government was to be issued out to place
      turnpikes and barriers on the road to prevent people travelling,
      and that the towns on the road would not suffer people from
      London to pass for fear of bringing the infection along with
      them, though neither of these rumours had any foundation but in
      the imagination, especially at-first.

      I now began to consider seriously with myself concerning my own
      case, and how I should dispose of myself; that is to say, whether
      I should resolve to stay in London or shut up my house and flee,
      as many of my neighbours did. I have set this particular down so
      fully, because I know not but it may be of moment to those who
      come after me, if they come to be brought to the same distress,
      and to the same manner of making their choice; and therefore I
      desire this account may pass with them rather for a direction to
      themselves to act by than a history of my actings, seeing it may
      not be of one farthing value to them to note what became of me.

      I had two important things before me: the one was the carrying on
      my business and shop, which was considerable, and in which was
      embarked all my effects in the world; and the other was the
      preservation of my life in so dismal a calamity as I saw
      apparently was coming upon the whole city, and which, however
      great it was, my fears perhaps, as well as other people’s,
      represented to be much greater than it could be.

      The first consideration was of great moment to me; my trade was a
      saddler, and as my dealings were chiefly not by a shop or chance
      trade, but among the merchants trading to the English colonies in
      America, so my effects lay very much in the hands of such. I was
      a single man, ’tis true, but I had a family of servants whom I
      kept at my business; had a house, shop, and warehouses filled
      with goods; and, in short, to leave them all as things in such a
      case must be left (that is to say, without any overseer or person
      fit to be trusted with them), had been to hazard the loss not
      only of my trade, but of my goods, and indeed of all I had in the
      world.

      I had an elder brother at the same time in London, and not many
      years before come over from Portugal: and advising with him, his
      answer was in three words, the same that was given in another
      case quite different, viz., ‘Master, save thyself.’ In a word, he
      was for my retiring into the country, as he resolved to do
      himself with his family; telling me what he had, it seems, heard
      abroad, that the best preparation for the plague was to run away
      from it. As to my argument of losing my trade, my goods, or
      debts, he quite confuted me. He told me the same thing which I
      argued for my staying, viz., that I would trust God with my
      safety and health, was the strongest repulse to my pretensions of
      losing my trade and my goods; ‘for’, says he, ‘is it not as
      reasonable that you should trust God with the chance or risk of
      losing your trade, as that you should stay in so eminent a point
      of danger, and trust Him with your life?’

      I could not argue that I was in any strait as to a place where to
      go, having several friends and relations in Northamptonshire,
      whence our family first came from; and particularly, I had an
      only sister in Lincolnshire, very willing to receive and
      entertain me.

      My brother, who had already sent his wife and two children into
      Bedfordshire, and resolved to follow them, pressed my going very
      earnestly; and I had once resolved to comply with his desires,
      but at that time could get no horse; for though it is true all
      the people did not go out of the city of London, yet I may
      venture to say that in a manner all the horses did; for there was
      hardly a horse to be bought or hired in the whole city for some
      weeks. Once I resolved to travel on foot with one servant, and,
      as many did, lie at no inn, but carry a soldier’s tent with us,
      and so lie in the fields, the weather being very warm, and no
      danger from taking cold. I say, as many did, because several did
      so at last, especially those who had been in the armies in the
      war which had not been many years past; and I must needs say
      that, speaking of second causes, had most of the people that
      travelled done so, the plague had not been carried into so many
      country towns and houses as it was, to the great damage, and
      indeed to the ruin, of abundance of people.

      But then my servant, whom I had intended to take down with me,
      deceived me; and being frighted at the increase of the distemper,
      and not knowing when I should go, he took other measures, and
      left me, so I was put off for that time; and, one way or other, I
      always found that to appoint to go away was always crossed by
      some accident or other, so as to disappoint and put it off again;
      and this brings in a story which otherwise might be thought a
      needless digression, viz., about these disappointments being from
      Heaven.

      I mention this story also as the best method I can advise any
      person to take in such a case, especially if he be one that makes
      conscience of his duty, and would be directed what to do in it,
      namely, that he should keep his eye upon the particular
      providences which occur at that time, and look upon them
      complexly, as they regard one another, and as all together regard
      the question before him: and then, I think, he may safely take
      them for intimations from Heaven of what is his unquestioned duty
      to do in such a case; I mean as to going away from or staying in
      the place where we dwell, when visited with an infectious
      distemper.

      It came very warmly into my mind one morning, as I was musing on
      this particular thing, that as nothing attended us without the
      direction or permission of Divine Power, so these disappointments
      must have something in them extraordinary; and I ought to
      consider whether it did not evidently point out, or intimate to
      me, that it was the will of Heaven I should not go. It
      immediately followed in my thoughts, that if it really was from
      God that I should stay, He was able effectually to preserve me in
      the midst of all the death and danger that would surround me; and
      that if I attempted to secure myself by fleeing from my
      habitation, and acted contrary to these intimations, which I
      believe to be Divine, it was a kind of flying from God, and that
      He could cause His justice to overtake me when and where He
      thought fit.

      These thoughts quite turned my resolutions again, and when I came
      to discourse with my brother again I told him that I inclined to
      stay and take my lot in that station in which God had placed me,
      and that it seemed to be made more especially my duty, on the
      account of what I have said.

      My brother, though a very religious man himself, laughed at all I
      had suggested about its being an intimation from Heaven, and told
      me several stories of such foolhardy people, as he called them,
      as I was; that I ought indeed to submit to it as a work of Heaven
      if I had been any way disabled by distempers or diseases, and
      that then not being able to go, I ought to acquiesce in the
      direction of Him, who, having been my Maker, had an undisputed
      right of sovereignty in disposing of me, and that then there had
      been no difficulty to determine which was the call of His
      providence and which was not; but that I should take it as an
      intimation from Heaven that I should not go out of town, only
      because I could not hire a horse to go, or my fellow was run away
      that was to attend me, was ridiculous, since at the time I had my
      health and limbs, and other servants, and might with ease travel
      a day or two on foot, and having a good certificate of being in
      perfect health, might either hire a horse or take post on the
      road, as I thought fit.

      Then he proceeded to tell me of the mischievous consequences
      which attended the presumption of the Turks and Mahometans in
      Asia and in other places where he had been (for my brother, being
      a merchant, was a few years before, as I have already observed,
      returned from abroad, coming last from Lisbon), and how,
      presuming upon their professed predestinating notions, and of
      every man’s end being predetermined and unalterably beforehand
      decreed, they would go unconcerned into infected places and
      converse with infected persons, by which means they died at the
      rate of ten or fifteen thousand a week, whereas the Europeans or
      Christian merchants, who kept themselves retired and reserved,
      generally escaped the contagion.

      Upon these arguments my brother changed my resolutions again, and
      I began to resolve to go, and accordingly made all things ready;
      for, in short, the infection increased round me, and the bills
      were risen to almost seven hundred a week, and my brother told me
      he would venture to stay no longer. I desired him to let me
      consider of it but till the next day, and I would resolve: and as
      I had already prepared everything as well as I could as to MY
      business, and whom to entrust my affairs with, I had little to do
      but to resolve.

      I went home that evening greatly oppressed in my mind,
      irresolute, and not knowing what to do. I had set the evening
      wholly—apart to consider seriously about it, and was all alone;
      for already people had, as it were by a general consent, taken up
      the custom of not going out of doors after sunset; the reasons I
      shall have occasion to say more of by-and-by.

      In the retirement of this evening I endeavoured to resolve,
      first, what was my duty to do, and I stated the arguments with
      which my brother had pressed me to go into the country, and I
      set, against them the strong impressions which I had on my mind
      for staying; the visible call I seemed to have from the
      particular circumstance of my calling, and the care due from me
      for the preservation of my effects, which were, as I might say,
      my estate; also the intimations which I thought I had from
      Heaven, that to me signified a kind of direction to venture; and
      it occurred to me that if I had what I might call a direction to
      stay, I ought to suppose it contained a promise of being
      preserved if I obeyed.

      This lay close to me, and my mind seemed more and more encouraged
      to stay than ever, and supported with a secret satisfaction that
      I should be kept. Add to this, that, turning over the Bible which
      lay before me, and while my thoughts were more than ordinarily
      serious upon the question, I cried out, ‘Well, I know not what to
      do; Lord, direct me !’ and the like; and at that juncture I
      happened to stop turning over the book at the ninety-first Psalm,
      and casting my eye on the second verse, I read on to the seventh
      verse exclusive, and after that included the tenth, as follows:
      ‘I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God,
      in Him will I trust. Surely He shall deliver thee from the snare
      of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover
      thee with His feathers, and under His wings shalt thou trust: His
      truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shalt not be afraid
      for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day;
      nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the
      destruction that wasteth at noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy
      side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come
      nigh thee. Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the
      reward of the wicked. Because thou hast made the Lord, which is
      my refuge, even the most High, thy habitation; there shall no
      evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy
      dwelling,’ &C.

      I scarce need tell the reader that from that moment I resolved
      that I would stay in the town, and casting myself entirely upon
      the goodness and protection of the Almighty, would not seek any
      other shelter whatever; and that, as my times were in His hands,
      He was as able to keep me in a time of the infection as in a time
      of health; and if He did not think fit to deliver me, still I was
      in His hands, and it was meet He should do with me as should seem
      good to Him.

      With this resolution I went to bed; and I was further confirmed
      in it the next day by the woman being taken ill with whom I had
      intended to entrust my house and all my affairs. But I had a
      further obligation laid on me on the same side, for the next day
      I found myself very much out of order also, so that if I would
      have gone away, I could not, and I continued ill three or four
      days, and this entirely determined my stay; so I took my leave of
      my brother, who went away to Dorking, in Surrey, and afterwards
      fetched a round farther into Buckinghamshire or Bedfordshire, to
      a retreat he had found out there for his family.

      It was a very ill time to be sick in, for if any one complained,
      it was immediately said he had the plague; and though I had
      indeed no symptom of that distemper, yet being very ill, both in
      my head and in my stomach, I was not without apprehension that I
      really was infected; but in about three days I grew better; the
      third night I rested well, sweated a little, and was much
      refreshed. The apprehensions of its being the infection went also
      quite away with my illness, and I went about my business as
      usual.

      These things, however, put off all my thoughts of going into the
      country; and my brother also being gone, I had no more debate
      either with him or with myself on that subject.

      It was now mid-July, and the plague, which had chiefly raged at
      the other end of the town, and, as I said before, in the parishes
      of St Giles, St Andrew’s, Holborn, and towards Westminster, began
      to now come eastward towards the part where I lived. It was to be
      observed, indeed, that it did not come straight on towards us;
      for the city, that is to say, within the walls, was indifferently
      healthy still; nor was it got then very much over the water into
      Southwark; for though there died that week 1268 of all
      distempers, whereof it might be supposed above 600 died of the
      plague, yet there was but twenty-eight in the whole city, within
      the walls, and but nineteen in Southwark, Lambeth parish
      included; whereas in the parishes of St Giles and St
      Martin-in-the-Fields alone there died 421.

      But we perceived the infection kept chiefly in the out-parishes,
      which being very populous, and fuller also of poor, the distemper
      found more to prey upon than in the city, as I shall observe
      afterwards. We perceived, I say, the distemper to draw our way,
      viz., by the parishes of Clarkenwell, Cripplegate, Shoreditch,
      and Bishopsgate; which last two parishes joining to Aldgate,
      Whitechappel, and Stepney, the infection came at length to spread
      its utmost rage and violence in those parts, even when it abated
      at the western parishes where it began.

      It was very strange to observe that in this particular week, from
      the 4th to the 11th of July, when, as I have observed, there died
      near 400 of the plague in the two parishes of St Martin and St
      Giles-in-the-Fields only, there died in the parish of Aldgate but
      four, in the parish of Whitechappel three, in the parish of
      Stepney but one.

      Likewise in the next week, from the 11th of July to the 18th,
      when the week’s bill was 1761, yet there died no more of the
      plague, on the whole Southwark side of the water, than sixteen.
      But this face of things soon changed, and it began to thicken in
      Cripplegate parish especially, and in Clarkenwell; so that by the
      second week in August, Cripplegate parish alone buried 886, and
      Clarkenwell 155. Of the first, 850 might well be reckoned to die
      of the plague; and of the last, the bill itself said 145 were of
      the plague.

      During the month of July, and while, as I have observed, our part
      of the town seemed to be spared in comparison of the west part, I
      went ordinarily about the streets, as my business required, and
      particularly went generally once in a day, or in two days, into
      the city, to my brother’s house, which he had given me charge of,
      and to see if it was safe; and having the key in my pocket, I
      used to go into the house, and over most of the rooms, to see
      that all was well; for though it be something wonderful to tell,
      that any should have hearts so hardened in the midst of such a
      calamity as to rob and steal, yet certain it is that all sorts of
      villainies, and even levities and debaucheries, were then
      practised in the town as openly as ever—I will not say quite as
      frequently, because the numbers of people were many ways
      lessened.

      But the city itself began now to be visited too, I mean within
      the walls; but the number of people there were indeed extremely
      lessened by so great a multitude having been gone into the
      country; and even all this month of July they continued to flee,
      though not in such multitudes as formerly. In August, indeed,
      they fled in such a manner that I began to think there would be
      really none but magistrates and servants left in the city.

      As they fled now out of the city, so I should observe that the
      Court removed early, viz., in the month of June, and went to
      Oxford, where it pleased God to preserve them; and the distemper
      did not, as I heard of, so much as touch them, for which I cannot
      say that I ever saw they showed any great token of thankfulness,
      and hardly anything of reformation, though they did not want
      being told that their crying vices might without breach of
      charity be said to have gone far in bringing that terrible
      judgement upon the whole nation.

      The face of London was—now indeed strangely altered: I mean the
      whole mass of buildings, city, liberties, suburbs, Westminster,
      Southwark, and altogether; for as to the particular part called
      the city, or within the walls, that was not yet much infected.
      But in the whole the face of things, I say, was much altered;
      sorrow and sadness sat upon every face; and though some parts
      were not yet overwhelmed, yet all looked deeply concerned; and,
      as we saw it apparently coming on, so every one looked on himself
      and his family as in the utmost danger. Were it possible to
      represent those times exactly to those that did not see them, and
      give the reader due ideas of the horror ‘that everywhere
      presented itself, it must make just impressions upon their minds
      and fill them with surprise. London might well be said to be all
      in tears; the mourners did not go about the streets indeed, for
      nobody put on black or made a formal dress of mourning for their
      nearest friends; but the voice of mourners was truly heard in the
      streets. The shrieks of women and children at the windows and
      doors of their houses, where their dearest relations were perhaps
      dying, or just dead, were so frequent to be heard as we passed
      the streets, that it was enough to pierce the stoutest heart in
      the world to hear them. Tears and lamentations were seen almost
      in every house, especially in the first part of the visitation;
      for towards the latter end men’s hearts were hardened, and death
      was so always before their eyes, that they did not so much
      concern themselves for the loss of their friends, expecting that
      themselves should be summoned the next hour.

      Business led me out sometimes to the other end of the town, even
      when the sickness was chiefly there; and as the thing was new to
      me, as well as to everybody else, it was a most surprising thing
      to see those streets which were usually so thronged now grown
      desolate, and so few people to be seen in them, that if I had
      been a stranger and at a loss for my way, I might sometimes have
      gone the length of a whole street (I mean of the by-streets), and
      seen nobody to direct me except watchmen set at the doors of such
      houses as were shut up, of which I shall speak presently.

      One day, being at that part of the town on some special business,
      curiosity led me to observe things more than usually, and indeed
      I walked a great way where I had no business. I went up Holborn,
      and there the street was full of people, but they walked in the
      middle of the great street, neither on one side or other,
      because, as I suppose, they would not mingle with anybody that
      came out of houses, or meet with smells and scent from houses
      that might be infected.

      The Inns of Court were all shut up; nor were very many of the
      lawyers in the Temple, or Lincoln’s Inn, or Gray’s Inn, to be
      seen there. Everybody was at peace; there was no occasion for
      lawyers; besides, it being in the time of the vacation too, they
      were generally gone into the country. Whole rows of houses in
      some places were shut close up, the inhabitants all fled, and
      only a watchman or two left.

      When I speak of rows of houses being shut up, I do not mean shut
      up by the magistrates, but that great numbers of persons followed
      the Court, by the necessity of their employments and other
      dependences; and as others retired, really frighted with the
      distemper, it was a mere desolating of some of the streets. But
      the fright was not yet near so great in the city, abstractly so
      called, and particularly because, though they were at first in a
      most inexpressible consternation, yet as I have observed that the
      distemper intermitted often at first, so they were, as it were,
      alarmed and unalarmed again, and this several times, till it
      began to be familiar to them; and that even when it appeared
      violent, yet seeing it did not presently spread into the city, or
      the east and south parts, the people began to take courage, and
      to be, as I may say, a little hardened. It is true a vast many
      people fled, as I have observed, yet they were chiefly from the
      west end of the town, and from that we call the heart of the
      city: that is to say, among the wealthiest of the people, and
      such people as were unencumbered with trades and business. But of
      the rest, the generality stayed, and seemed to abide the worst;
      so that in the place we call the Liberties, and in the suburbs,
      in Southwark, and in the east part, such as Wapping, Ratcliff,
      Stepney, Rotherhithe, and the like, the people generally stayed,
      except here and there a few wealthy families, who, as above, did
      not depend upon their business.

      It must not be forgot here that the city and suburbs were
      prodigiously full of people at the time of this visitation, I
      mean at the time that it began; for though I have lived to see a
      further increase, and mighty throngs of people settling in London
      more than ever, yet we had always a notion that the numbers of
      people which, the wars being over, the armies disbanded, and the
      royal family and the monarchy being restored, had flocked to
      London to settle in business, or to depend upon and attend the
      Court for rewards of services, preferments, and the like, was
      such that the town was computed to have in it above a hundred
      thousand people more than ever it held before; nay, some took
      upon them to say it had twice as many, because all the ruined
      families of the royal party flocked hither. All the old soldiers
      set up trades here, and abundance of families settled here.
      Again, the Court brought with them a great flux of pride, and new
      fashions. All people were grown gay and luxurious, and the joy of
      the Restoration had brought a vast many families to London.

      I often thought that as Jerusalem was besieged by the Romans when
      the Jews were assembled together to celebrate the Passover—by
      which means an incredible number of people were surprised there
      who would otherwise have been in other countries—so the plague
      entered London when an incredible increase of people had happened
      occasionally, by the particular circumstances above-named. As
      this conflux of the people to a youthful and gay Court made a
      great trade in the city, especially in everything that belonged
      to fashion and finery, so it drew by consequence a great number
      of workmen, manufacturers, and the like, being mostly poor people
      who depended upon their labour. And I remember in particular that
      in a representation to my Lord Mayor of the condition of the
      poor, it was estimated that there were no less than an hundred
      thousand riband-weavers in and about the city, the chiefest
      number of whom lived then in the parishes of Shoreditch, Stepney,
      Whitechappel, and Bishopsgate, that, namely, about Spitalfields;
      that is to say, as Spitalfields was then, for it was not so large
      as now by one fifth part.

      By this, however, the number of people in the whole may be judged
      of; and, indeed, I often wondered that, after the prodigious
      numbers of people that went away at first, there was yet so great
      a multitude left as it appeared there was.

      But I must go back again to the beginning of this surprising
      time. While the fears of the people were young, they were
      increased strangely by several odd accidents which, put
      altogether, it was really a wonder the whole body of the people
      did not rise as one man and abandon their dwellings, leaving the
      place as a space of ground designed by Heaven for an Akeldama,
      doomed to be destroyed from the face of the earth, and that all
      that would be found in it would perish with it. I shall name but
      a few of these things; but sure they were so many, and so many
      wizards and cunning people propagating them, that I have often
      wondered there was any (women especially) left behind.

      In the first place, a blazing star or comet appeared for several
      months before the plague, as there did the year after another, a
      little before the fire. The old women and the phlegmatic
      hypochondriac part of the other sex, whom I could almost call old
      women too, remarked (especially afterward, though not till both
      those judgements were over) that those two comets passed directly
      over the city, and that so very near the houses that it was plain
      they imported something peculiar to the city alone; that the
      comet before the pestilence was of a faint, dull, languid colour,
      and its motion very heavy, Solemn, and slow; but that the comet
      before the fire was bright and sparkling, or, as others said,
      flaming, and its motion swift and furious; and that, accordingly,
      one foretold a heavy judgement, slow but severe, terrible and
      frightful, as was the plague; but the other foretold a stroke,
      sudden, swift, and fiery as the conflagration. Nay, so particular
      some people were, that as they looked upon that comet preceding
      the fire, they fancied that they not only saw it pass swiftly and
      fiercely, and could perceive the motion with their eye, but even
      they heard it; that it made a rushing, mighty noise, fierce and
      terrible, though at a distance, and but just perceivable.

      I saw both these stars, and, I must confess, had so much of the
      common notion of such things in my head, that I was apt to look
      upon them as the forerunners and warnings of God’s judgements;
      and especially when, after the plague had followed the first, I
      yet saw another of the like kind, I could not but say God had not
      yet sufficiently scourged the city.

      But I could not at the same time carry these things to the height
      that others did, knowing, too, that natural causes are assigned
      by the astronomers for such things, and that their motions and
      even their revolutions are calculated, or pretended to be
      calculated, so that they cannot be so perfectly called the
      forerunners or foretellers, much less the procurers, of such
      events as pestilence, war, fire, and the like.

      But let my thoughts and the thoughts of the philosophers be, or
      have been, what they will, these things had a more than ordinary
      influence upon the minds of the common people, and they had
      almost universal melancholy apprehensions of some dreadful
      calamity and judgement coming upon the city; and this principally
      from the sight of this comet, and the little alarm that was given
      in December by two people dying at St Giles’s, as above.

      The apprehensions of the people were likewise strangely increased
      by the error of the times; in which, I think, the people, from
      what principle I cannot imagine, were more addicted to prophecies
      and astrological conjurations, dreams, and old wives’ tales than
      ever they were before or since. Whether this unhappy temper was
      originally raised by the follies of some people who got money by
      it—that is to say, by printing predictions and prognostications—I
      know not; but certain it is, books frighted them terribly, such
      as Lilly’s Almanack, Gadbury’s Astrological Predictions, Poor
      Robin’s Almanack, and the like; also several pretended religious
      books, one entitled, Come out of her, my People, lest you be
      Partaker of her Plagues; another called, Fair Warning; another,
      Britain’s Remembrancer; and many such, all, or most part of
      which, foretold, directly or covertly, the ruin of the city. Nay,
      some were so enthusiastically bold as to run about the streets
      with their oral predictions, pretending they were sent to preach
      to the city; and one in particular, who, like Jonah to Nineveh,
      cried in the streets, ‘Yet forty days, and London shall be
      destroyed.’ I will not be positive whether he said yet forty days
      or yet a few days. Another ran about naked, except a pair of
      drawers about his waist, crying day and night, like a man that
      Josephus mentions, who cried, ‘Woe to Jerusalem!’ a little before
      the destruction of that city. So this poor naked creature cried,
      ‘Oh, the great and the dreadful God!’ and said no more, but
      repeated those words continually, with a voice and countenance
      full of horror, a swift pace; and nobody could ever find him to
      stop or rest, or take any sustenance, at least that ever I could
      hear of. I met this poor creature several times in the streets,
      and would have spoken to him, but he would not enter into speech
      with me or any one else, but held on his dismal cries
      continually.

      These things terrified the people to the last degree, and
      especially when two or three times, as I have mentioned already,
      they found one or two in the bills dead of the plague at St
      Giles’s.

      Next to these public things were the dreams of old women, or, I
      should say, the interpretation of old women upon other people’s
      dreams; and these put abundance of people even out of their wits.
      Some heard voices warning them to be gone, for that there would
      be such a plague in London, so that the living would not be able
      to bury the dead. Others saw apparitions in the air; and I must
      be allowed to say of both, I hope without breach of charity, that
      they heard voices that never spake, and saw sights that never
      appeared; but the imagination of the people was really turned
      wayward and possessed. And no wonder, if they who were poring
      continually at the clouds saw shapes and figures, representations
      and appearances, which had nothing in them but air, and vapour.
      Here they told us they saw a flaming sword held in a hand coming
      out of a cloud, with a point hanging directly over the city;
      there they saw hearses and coffins in the air carrying to be
      buried; and there again, heaps of dead bodies lying unburied, and
      the like, just as the imagination of the poor terrified people
      furnished them with matter to work upon.

      So hypochondriac fancies represent
      Ships, armies, battles in the firmament;
      Till steady eyes the exhalations solve,
      And all to its first matter, cloud, resolve.


      I could fill this account with the strange relations such people
      gave every day of what they had seen; and every one was so
      positive of their having seen what they pretended to see, that
      there was no contradicting them without breach of friendship, or
      being accounted rude and unmannerly on the one hand, and profane
      and impenetrable on the other. One time before the plague was
      begun (otherwise than as I have said in St Giles’s), I think it
      was in March, seeing a crowd of people in the street, I joined
      with them to satisfy my curiosity, and found them all staring up
      into the air to see what a woman told them appeared plain to her,
      which was an angel clothed in white, with a fiery sword in his
      hand, waving it or brandishing it over his head. She described
      every part of the figure to the life, showed them the motion and
      the form, and the poor people came into it so eagerly, and with
      so much readiness; ‘Yes, I see it all plainly,’ says one;
      ‘there’s the sword as plain as can be.’ Another saw the angel.
      One saw his very face, and cried out what a glorious creature he
      was! One saw one thing, and one another. I looked as earnestly as
      the rest, but perhaps not with so much willingness to be imposed
      upon; and I said, indeed, that I could see nothing but a white
      cloud, bright on one side by the shining of the sun upon the
      other part. The woman endeavoured to show it me, but could not
      make me confess that I saw it, which, indeed, if I had I must
      have lied. But the woman, turning upon me, looked in my face, and
      fancied I laughed, in which her imagination deceived her too, for
      I really did not laugh, but was very seriously reflecting how the
      poor people were terrified by the force of their own imagination.
      However, she turned from me, called me profane fellow, and a
      scoffer; told me that it was a time of God’s anger, and dreadful
      judgements were approaching, and that despisers such as I should
      wander and perish.

      The people about her seemed disgusted as well as she; and I found
      there was no persuading them that I did not laugh at them, and
      that I should be rather mobbed by them than be able to undeceive
      them. So I left them; and this appearance passed for as real as
      the blazing star itself.

      Another encounter I had in the open day also; and this was in
      going through a narrow passage from Petty France into Bishopsgate
      Churchyard, by a row of alms-houses. There are two churchyards to
      Bishopsgate church or parish; one we go over to pass from the
      place called Petty France into Bishopsgate Street, coming out
      just by the church door; the other is on the side of the narrow
      passage where the alms-houses are on the left; and a dwarf-wall
      with a palisado on it on the right hand, and the city wall on the
      other side more to the right.

      In this narrow passage stands a man looking through between the
      palisadoes into the burying-place, and as many people as the
      narrowness of the passage would admit to stop, without hindering
      the passage of others, and he was talking mightily eagerly to
      them, and pointing now to one place, then to another, and
      affirming that he saw a ghost walking upon such a gravestone
      there. He described the shape, the posture, and the movement of
      it so exactly that it was the greatest matter of amazement to him
      in the world that everybody did not see it as well as he. On a
      sudden he would cry, ‘There it is; now it comes this way.’ Then,
      ’Tis turned back’; till at length he persuaded the people into so
      firm a belief of it, that one fancied he saw it, and another
      fancied he saw it; and thus he came every day making a strange
      hubbub, considering it was in so narrow a passage, till
      Bishopsgate clock struck eleven, and then the ghost would seem to
      start, and, as if he were called away, disappeared on a sudden.

      I looked earnestly every way, and at the very moment that this
      man directed, but could not see the least appearance of anything;
      but so positive was this poor man, that he gave the people the
      vapours in abundance, and sent them away trembling and frighted,
      till at length few people that knew of it cared to go through
      that passage, and hardly anybody by night on any account
      whatever.

      This ghost, as the poor man affirmed, made signs to the houses,
      and to the ground, and to the people, plainly intimating, or else
      they so understanding it, that abundance of the people should
      come to be buried in that churchyard, as indeed happened; but
      that he saw such aspects I must acknowledge I never believed, nor
      could I see anything of it myself, though I looked most earnestly
      to see it, if possible.

      These things serve to show how far the people were really
      overcome with delusions; and as they had a notion of the approach
      of a visitation, all their predictions ran upon a most dreadful
      plague, which should lay the whole city, and even the kingdom,
      waste, and should destroy almost all the nation, both man and
      beast.

      To this, as I said before, the astrologers added stories of the
      conjunctions of planets in a malignant manner and with a
      mischievous influence, one of which conjunctions was to happen,
      and did happen, in October, and the other in November; and they
      filled the people’s heads with predictions on these signs of the
      heavens, intimating that those conjunctions foretold drought,
      famine, and pestilence. In the two first of them, however, they
      were entirely mistaken, for we had no droughty season, but in the
      beginning of the year a hard frost, which lasted from December
      almost to March, and after that moderate weather, rather warm
      than hot, with refreshing winds, and, in short, very seasonable
      weather, and also several very great rains.

      Some endeavours were used to suppress the printing of such books
      as terrified the people, and to frighten the dispersers of them,
      some of whom were taken up; but nothing was done in it, as I am
      informed, the Government being unwilling to exasperate the
      people, who were, as I may say, all out of their wits already.

      Neither can I acquit those ministers that in their sermons rather
      sank than lifted up the hearts of their hearers. Many of them no
      doubt did it for the strengthening the resolution of the people,
      and especially for quickening them to repentance, but it
      certainly answered not their end, at least not in proportion to
      the injury it did another way; and indeed, as God Himself through
      the whole Scriptures rather draws to Him by invitations and calls
      to turn to Him and live, than drives us by terror and amazement,
      so I must confess I thought the ministers should have done also,
      imitating our blessed Lord and Master in this, that His whole
      Gospel is full of declarations from heaven of God’s mercy, and
      His readiness to receive penitents and forgive them, complaining,
      ‘Ye will not come unto Me that ye may have life’, and that
      therefore His Gospel is called the Gospel of Peace and the Gospel
      of Grace.

      But we had some good men, and that of all persuasions and
      opinions, whose discourses were full of terror, who spoke nothing
      but dismal things; and as they brought the people together with a
      kind of horror, sent them away in tears, prophesying nothing but
      evil tidings, terrifying the people with the apprehensions of
      being utterly destroyed, not guiding them, at least not enough,
      to cry to heaven for mercy.

      It was, indeed, a time of very unhappy breaches among us in
      matters of religion. Innumerable sects and divisions and separate
      opinions prevailed among the people. The Church of England was
      restored, indeed, with the restoration of the monarchy, about
      four years before; but the ministers and preachers of the
      Presbyterians and Independents, and of all the other sorts of
      professions, had begun to gather separate societies and erect
      altar against altar, and all those had their meetings for worship
      apart, as they have now, but not so many then, the Dissenters
      being not thoroughly formed into a body as they are since; and
      those congregations which were thus gathered together were yet
      but few. And even those that were, the Government did not allow,
      but endeavoured to suppress them and shut up their meetings.

      But the visitation reconciled them again, at least for a time,
      and many of the best and most valuable ministers and preachers of
      the Dissenters were suffered to go into the churches where the
      incumbents were fled away, as many were, not being able to stand
      it; and the people flocked without distinction to hear them
      preach, not much inquiring who or what opinion they were of. But
      after the sickness was over, that spirit of charity abated; and
      every church being again supplied with their own ministers, or
      others presented where the minister was dead, things returned to
      their old channel again.

      One mischief always introduces another. These terrors and
      apprehensions of the people led them into a thousand weak,
      foolish, and wicked things, which they wanted not a sort of
      people really wicked to encourage them to: and this was running
      about to fortune-tellers, cunning-men, and astrologers to know
      their fortune, or, as it is vulgarly expressed, to have their
      fortunes told them, their nativities calculated, and the like;
      and this folly presently made the town swarm with a wicked
      generation of pretenders to magic, to the black art, as they
      called it, and I know not what; nay, to a thousand worse dealings
      with the devil than they were really guilty of. And this trade
      grew so open and so generally practised that it became common to
      have signs and inscriptions set up at doors: ‘Here lives a
      fortune-teller’, ‘Here lives an astrologer’, ‘Here you may have
      your nativity calculated’, and the like; and Friar Bacon’s
      brazen-head, which was the usual sign of these people’s
      dwellings, was to be seen almost in every street, or else the
      sign of Mother Shipton, or of Merlin’s head, and the like.

      With what blind, absurd, and ridiculous stuff these oracles of
      the devil pleased and satisfied the people I really know not, but
      certain it is that innumerable attendants crowded about their
      doors every day. And if but a grave fellow in a velvet jacket, a
      band, and a black coat, which was the habit those quack-conjurers
      generally went in, was but seen in the streets the people would
      follow them in crowds, and ask them questions as they went along.

      I need not mention what a horrid delusion this was, or what it
      tended to; but there was no remedy for it till the plague itself
      put an end to it all—and, I suppose, cleared the town of most of
      those calculators themselves. One mischief was, that if the poor
      people asked these mock astrologers whether there would be a
      plague or no, they all agreed in general to answer ‘Yes’, for
      that kept up their trade. And had the people not been kept in a
      fright about that, the wizards would presently have been rendered
      useless, and their craft had been at an end. But they always
      talked to them of such-and-such influences of the stars, of the
      conjunctions of such-and-such planets, which must necessarily
      bring sickness and distempers, and consequently the plague. And
      some had the assurance to tell them the plague was begun already,
      which was too true, though they that said so knew nothing of the
      matter.

      The ministers, to do them justice, and preachers of most sorts
      that were serious and understanding persons, thundered against
      these and other wicked practices, and exposed the folly as well
      as the wickedness of them together, and the most sober and
      judicious people despised and abhorred them. But it was
      impossible to make any impression upon the middling people and
      the working labouring poor. Their fears were predominant over all
      their passions, and they threw away their money in a most
      distracted manner upon those whimsies. Maid-servants especially,
      and men-servants, were the chief of their customers, and their
      question generally was, after the first demand of ‘Will there be
      a plague?’ I say, the next question was, ‘Oh, sir I for the
      Lord’s sake, what will become of me? Will my mistress keep me, or
      will she turn me off? Will she stay here, or will she go into the
      country? And if she goes into the country, will she take me with
      her, or leave me here to be starved and undone?’ And the like of
      menservants.

      The truth is, the case of poor servants was very dismal, as I
      shall have occasion to mention again by-and-by, for it was
      apparent a prodigious number of them would be turned away, and it
      was so. And of them abundance perished, and particularly of those
      that these false prophets had flattered with hopes that they
      should be continued in their services, and carried with their
      masters and mistresses into the country; and had not public
      charity provided for these poor creatures, whose number was
      exceeding great and in all cases of this nature must be so, they
      would have been in the worst condition of any people in the city.

      These things agitated the minds of the common people for many
      months, while the first apprehensions were upon them, and while
      the plague was not, as I may say, yet broken out. But I must also
      not forget that the more serious part of the inhabitants behaved
      after another manner. The Government encouraged their devotion,
      and appointed public prayers and days of fasting and humiliation,
      to make public confession of sin and implore the mercy of God to
      avert the dreadful judgement which hung over their heads; and it
      is not to be expressed with what alacrity the people of all
      persuasions embraced the occasion; how they flocked to the
      churches and meetings, and they were all so thronged that there
      was often no coming near, no, not to the very doors of the
      largest churches. Also there were daily prayers appointed morning
      and evening at several churches, and days of private praying at
      other places; at all which the people attended, I say, with an
      uncommon devotion. Several private families also, as well of one
      opinion as of another, kept family fasts, to which they admitted
      their near relations only. So that, in a word, those people who
      were really serious and religious applied themselves in a truly
      Christian manner to the proper work of repentance and
      humiliation, as a Christian people ought to do.

      Again, the public showed that they would bear their share in
      these things; the very Court, which was then gay and luxurious,
      put on a face of just concern for the public danger. All the
      plays and interludes which, after the manner of the French Court,
      had been set up, and began to increase among us, were forbid to
      act; the gaming-tables, public dancing-rooms, and music-houses,
      which multiplied and began to debauch the manners of the people,
      were shut up and suppressed; and the jack-puddings,
      merry-andrews, puppet-shows, rope-dancers, and such-like doings,
      which had bewitched the poor common people, shut up their shops,
      finding indeed no trade; for the minds of the people were
      agitated with other things, and a kind of sadness and horror at
      these things sat upon the countenances even of the common people.
      Death was before their eyes, and everybody began to think of
      their graves, not of mirth and diversions.

      But even those wholesome reflections—which, rightly managed,
      would have most happily led the people to fall upon their knees,
      make confession of their sins, and look up to their merciful
      Saviour for pardon, imploring His compassion on them in such a
      time of their distress, by which we might have been as a second
      Nineveh—had a quite contrary extreme in the common people, who,
      ignorant and stupid in their reflections as they were brutishly
      wicked and thoughtless before, were now led by their fright to
      extremes of folly; and, as I have said before, that they ran to
      conjurers and witches, and all sorts of deceivers, to know what
      should become of them (who fed their fears, and kept them always
      alarmed and awake on purpose to delude them and pick their
      pockets), so they were as mad upon their running after quacks and
      mountebanks, and every practising old woman, for medicines and
      remedies; storing themselves with such multitudes of pills,
      potions, and preservatives, as they were called, that they not
      only spent their money but even poisoned themselves beforehand
      for fear of the poison of the infection; and prepared their
      bodies for the plague, instead of preserving them against it. On
      the other hand it is incredible and scarce to be imagined, how
      the posts of houses and corners of streets were plastered over
      with doctors’ bills and papers of ignorant fellows, quacking and
      tampering in physic, and inviting the people to come to them for
      remedies, which was generally set off with such flourishes as
      these, viz.: ‘Infallible preventive pills against the plague.’
      ‘Neverfailing preservatives against the infection.’ ‘Sovereign
      cordials against the corruption of the air.’ ‘Exact regulations
      for the conduct of the body in case of an infection.’
      ‘Anti-pestilential pills.’ ‘Incomparable drink against the
      plague, never found out before.’ ‘An universal remedy for the
      plague.’ ‘The only true plague water.’ ‘The royal antidote
      against all kinds of infection’;—and such a number more that I
      cannot reckon up; and if I could, would fill a book of themselves
      to set them down.

      Others set up bills to summon people to their lodgings for
      directions and advice in the case of infection. These had
      specious titles also, such as these:—

      ‘An eminent High Dutch physician, newly come over from Holland,
      where he resided during all the time of the great plague last
      year in Amsterdam, and cured multitudes of people that actually
      had the plague upon them.’

      ‘An Italian gentlewoman just arrived from Naples, having a choice
      secret to prevent infection, which she found out by her great
      experience, and did wonderful cures with it in the late plague
      there, wherein there died 20,000 in one day.’

      ‘An ancient gentlewoman, having practised with great success in
      the late plague in this city, anno 1636, gives her advice only to
      the female sex. To be spoken with,’ &c.

      ‘An experienced physician, who has long studied the doctrine of
      antidotes against all sorts of poison and infection, has, after
      forty years’ practice, arrived to such skill as may, with God’s
      blessing, direct persons how to prevent their being touched by
      any contagious distemper whatsoever. He directs the poor gratis.’

      I take notice of these by way of specimen. I could give you two
      or three dozen of the like and yet have abundance left behind.
      ’Tis sufficient from these to apprise any one of the humour of
      those times, and how a set of thieves and pickpockets not only
      robbed and cheated the poor people of their money, but poisoned
      their bodies with odious and fatal preparations; some with
      mercury, and some with other things as bad, perfectly remote from
      the thing pretended to, and rather hurtful than serviceable to
      the body in case an infection followed.

      I cannot omit a subtility of one of those quack operators, with
      which he gulled the poor people to crowd about him, but did
      nothing for them without money. He had, it seems, added to his
      bills, which he gave about the streets, this advertisement in
      capital letters, viz., ‘He gives advice to the poor for nothing.’

      Abundance of poor people came to him accordingly, to whom he made
      a great many fine speeches, examined them of the state of their
      health and of the constitution of their bodies, and told them
      many good things for them to do, which were of no great moment.
      But the issue and conclusion of all was, that he had a
      preparation which if they took such a quantity of every morning,
      he would pawn his life they should never have the plague; no,
      though they lived in the house with people that were infected.
      This made the people all resolve to have it; but then the price
      of that was so much, I think ’twas half-a-crown. ‘But, sir,’ says
      one poor woman, ‘I am a poor almswoman and am kept by the parish,
      and your bills say you give the poor your help for nothing.’ ‘Ay,
      good woman,’ says the doctor, ‘so I do, as I published there. I
      give my advice to the poor for nothing, but not my physic.’
      ‘Alas, sir!’ says she, ‘that is a snare laid for the poor, then;
      for you give them advice for nothing; that is to say, you advise
      them gratis, to buy your physic for their money; so does every
      shop-keeper with his wares.’ Here the woman began to give him ill
      words, and stood at his door all that day, telling her tale to
      all the people that came, till the doctor finding she turned away
      his customers, was obliged to call her upstairs again, and give
      her his box of physic for nothing, which perhaps, too, was good
      for nothing when she had it.

      But to return to the people, whose confusions fitted them to be
      imposed upon by all sorts of pretenders and by every mountebank.
      There is no doubt but these quacking sort of fellows raised great
      gains out of the miserable people, for we daily found the crowds
      that ran after them were infinitely greater, and their doors were
      more thronged than those of Dr Brooks, Dr Upton, Dr Hodges, Dr
      Berwick, or any, though the most famous men of the time. And I
      was told that some of them got five pounds a day by their physic.

      But there was still another madness beyond all this, which may
      serve to give an idea of the distracted humour of the poor people
      at that time: and this was their following a worse sort of
      deceivers than any of these; for these petty thieves only deluded
      them to pick their pockets and get their money, in which their
      wickedness, whatever it was, lay chiefly on the side of the
      deceivers, not upon the deceived. But in this part I am going to
      mention, it lay chiefly in the people deceived, or equally in
      both; and this was in wearing charms, philtres, exorcisms,
      amulets, and I know not what preparations, to fortify the body
      with them against the plague; as if the plague was not the hand
      of God, but a kind of possession of an evil spirit, and that it
      was to be kept off with crossings, signs of the zodiac, papers
      tied up with so many knots, and certain words or figures written
      on them, as particularly the word Abracadabra, formed in triangle
      or pyramid, thus:—

     ABRACADABRA
     ABRACADABR     Others had the Jesuits’
     ABRACADAB         mark in a cross:
     ABRACADA             I H
     ABRACAD               S.
     ABRACA
     ABRAC          Others nothing but this
     ABRA               mark, thus:
     ABR
     AB                   * *
     A                    {*}

      I might spend a great deal of time in my exclamations against the
      follies, and indeed the wickedness, of those things, in a time of
      such danger, in a matter of such consequences as this, of a
      national infection. But my memorandums of these things relate
      rather to take notice only of the fact, and mention only that it
      was so. How the poor people found the insufficiency of those
      things, and how many of them were afterwards carried away in the
      dead-carts and thrown into the common graves of every parish with
      these hellish charms and trumpery hanging about their necks,
      remains to be spoken of as we go along.

      All this was the effect of the hurry the people were in, after
      the first notion of the plague being at hand was among them, and
      which may be said to be from about Michaelmas 1664, but more
      particularly after the two men died in St Giles’s in the
      beginning of December; and again, after another alarm in
      February. For when the plague evidently spread itself, they soon
      began to see the folly of trusting to those unperforming
      creatures who had gulled them of their money; and then their
      fears worked another way, namely, to amazement and stupidity, not
      knowing what course to take or what to do either to help or
      relieve themselves. But they ran about from one neighbour’s house
      to another, and even in the streets from one door to another,
      with repeated cries of, ‘Lord, have mercy upon us! What shall we
      do?’

      Indeed, the poor people were to be pitied in one particular thing
      in which they had little or no relief, and which I desire to
      mention with a serious awe and reflection, which perhaps every
      one that reads this may not relish; namely, that whereas death
      now began not, as we may say, to hover over every one’s head
      only, but to look into their houses and chambers and stare in
      their faces. Though there might be some stupidity and dulness of
      the mind (and there was so, a great deal), yet there was a great
      deal of just alarm sounded into the very inmost soul, if I may so
      say, of others. Many consciences were awakened; many hard hearts
      melted into tears; many a penitent confession was made of crimes
      long concealed. It would wound the soul of any Christian to have
      heard the dying groans of many a despairing creature, and none
      durst come near to comfort them. Many a robbery, many a murder,
      was then confessed aloud, and nobody surviving to record the
      accounts of it. People might be heard, even into the streets as
      we passed along, calling upon God for mercy through Jesus Christ,
      and saying, ‘I have been a thief, ‘I have been an adulterer’, ‘I
      have been a murderer’, and the like, and none durst stop to make
      the least inquiry into such things or to administer comfort to
      the poor creatures that in the anguish both of soul and body thus
      cried out. Some of the ministers did visit the sick at first and
      for a little while, but it was not to be done. It would have been
      present death to have gone into some houses. The very buriers of
      the dead, who were the hardenedest creatures in town, were
      sometimes beaten back and so terrified that they durst not go
      into houses where the whole families were swept away together,
      and where the circumstances were more particularly horrible, as
      some were; but this was, indeed, at the first heat of the
      distemper.

      Time inured them to it all, and they ventured everywhere
      afterwards without hesitation, as I shall have occasion to
      mention at large hereafter.

      I am supposing now the plague to be begun, as I have said, and
      that the magistrates began to take the condition of the people
      into their serious consideration. What they did as to the
      regulation of the inhabitants and of infected families, I shall
      speak to by itself; but as to the affair of health, it is proper
      to mention it here that, having seen the foolish humour of the
      people in running after quacks and mountebanks, wizards and
      fortune-tellers, which they did as above, even to madness, the
      Lord Mayor, a very sober and religious gentleman, appointed
      physicians and surgeons for relief of the poor—I mean the
      diseased poor and in particular ordered the College of Physicians
      to publish directions for cheap remedies for the poor, in all the
      circumstances of the distemper. This, indeed, was one of the most
      charitable and judicious things that could be done at that time,
      for this drove the people from haunting the doors of every
      disperser of bills, and from taking down blindly and without
      consideration poison for physic and death instead of life.

      This direction of the physicians was done by a consultation of
      the whole College; and, as it was particularly calculated for the
      use of the poor and for cheap medicines, it was made public, so
      that everybody might see it, and copies were given gratis to all
      that desired it. But as it is public, and to be seen on all
      occasions, I need not give the reader of this the trouble of it.

      I shall not be supposed to lessen the authority or capacity of
      the physicians when I say that the violence of the distemper,
      when it came to its extremity, was like the fire the next year.
      The fire, which consumed what the plague could not touch, defied
      all the application of remedies; the fire-engines were broken,
      the buckets thrown away, and the power of man was baffled and
      brought to an end. So the Plague defied all medicines; the very
      physicians were seized with it, with their preservatives in their
      mouths; and men went about prescribing to others and telling them
      what to do till the tokens were upon them, and they dropped down
      dead, destroyed by that very enemy they directed others to
      oppose. This was the case of several physicians, even some of
      them the most eminent, and of several of the most skilful
      surgeons. Abundance of quacks too died, who had the folly to
      trust to their own medicines, which they must needs be conscious
      to themselves were good for nothing, and who rather ought, like
      other sorts of thieves, to have run away, sensible of their
      guilt, from the justice that they could not but expect should
      punish them as they knew they had deserved.

      Not that it is any derogation from the labour or application of
      the physicians to say they fell in the common calamity; nor is it
      so intended by me; it rather is to their praise that they
      ventured their lives so far as even to lose them in the service
      of mankind. They endeavoured to do good, and to save the lives of
      others. But we were not to expect that the physicians could stop
      God’s judgements, or prevent a distemper eminently armed from
      heaven from executing the errand it was sent about.

      Doubtless, the physicians assisted many by their skill, and by
      their prudence and applications, to the saving of their lives and
      restoring their health. But it is not lessening their character
      or their skill, to say they could not cure those that had the
      tokens upon them, or those who were mortally infected before the
      physicians were sent for, as was frequently the case.

      It remains to mention now what public measures were taken by the
      magistrates for the general safety, and to prevent the spreading
      of the distemper, when it first broke out. I shall have frequent
      occasion to speak of the prudence of the magistrates, their
      charity, their vigilance for the poor, and for preserving good
      order, furnishing provisions, and the like, when the plague was
      increased, as it afterwards was. But I am now upon the order and
      regulations they published for the government of infected
      families.

      I mentioned above shutting of houses up; and it is needful to say
      something particularly to that, for this part of the history of
      the plague is very melancholy, but the most grievous story must
      be told.

      About June the Lord Mayor of London and the Court of Aldermen, as
      I have said, began more particularly to concern themselves for
      the regulation of the city.

      The justices of Peace for Middlesex, by direction of the
      Secretary of State, had begun to shut up houses in the parishes
      of St Giles-in-the-Fields, St Martin, St Clement Danes, &c., and
      it was with good success; for in several streets where the plague
      broke out, upon strict guarding the houses that were infected,
      and taking care to bury those that died immediately after they
      were known to be dead, the plague ceased in those streets. It was
      also observed that the plague decreased sooner in those parishes
      after they had been visited to the full than it did in the
      parishes of Bishopsgate, Shoreditch, Aldgate, Whitechappel,
      Stepney, and others; the early care taken in that manner being a
      great means to the putting a check to it.

      This shutting up of houses was a method first taken, as I
      understand, in the plague which happened in 1603, at the coming
      of King James the First to the crown; and the power of shutting
      people up in their own houses was granted by Act of Parliament,
      entitled, ‘An Act for the charitable Relief and Ordering of
      Persons infected with the Plague’; on which Act of Parliament the
      Lord Mayor and aldermen of the city of London founded the order
      they made at this time, and which took place the 1st of July
      1665, when the numbers infected within the city were but few, the
      last bill for the ninety-two parishes being but four; and some
      houses having been shut up in the city, and some people being
      removed to the pest-house beyond Bunhill Fields, in the way to
      Islington,—I say, by these means, when there died near one
      thousand a week in the whole, the number in the city was but
      twenty-eight, and the city was preserved more healthy in
      proportion than any other place all the time of the infection.

      These orders of my Lord Mayor’s were published, as I have said,
      the latter end of June, and took place from the 1st of July, and
      were as follows, viz.:—

      ORDERS CONCEIVED AND PUBLISHED BY THE LORD MAYOR AND ALDERMEN OF
      THE CITY OF LONDON CONCERNING THE INFECTION OF THE PLAGUE, 1665.

      ‘WHEREAS in the reign of our late Sovereign King James, of happy
      memory, an Act was made for the charitable relief and ordering of
      persons infected with the plague, whereby authority was given to
      justices of the peace, mayors, bailiffs, and other head-officers
      to appoint within their several limits examiners, searchers,
      watchmen, keepers, and buriers for the persons and places
      infected, and to minister unto them oaths for the performance of
      their offices. And the same statute did also authorise the giving
      of other directions, as unto them for the present necessity
      should seem good in their directions. It is now, upon special
      consideration, thought very expedient for preventing and avoiding
      of infection of sickness (if it shall so please Almighty God)
      that these officers following be appointed, and these orders
      hereafter duly observed.

      Examiners to be appointed in every Parish.

      ‘First, it is thought requisite, and so ordered, that in every
      parish there be one, two, or more persons of good sort and credit
      chosen and appointed by the alderman, his deputy, and common
      council of every ward, by the name of examiners, to continue in
      that office the space of two months at least. And if any fit
      person so appointed shall refuse to undertake the same, the said
      parties so refusing to be committed to prison until they shall
      conform themselves accordingly.

      The Examiner’s Office.

      ‘That these examiners be sworn by the aldermen to inquire and
      learn from time to time what houses in every parish be visited,
      and what persons be sick, and of what diseases, as near as they
      can inform themselves; and upon doubt in that case, to command
      restraint of access until it appear what the disease shall prove.
      And if they find any person sick of the infection, to give order
      to the constable that the house be shut up; and if the constable
      shall be found remiss or negligent, to give present notice
      thereof to the alderman of the ward.

      Watchmen.

      ‘That to every infected house there be appointed two watchmen,
      one for every day, and the other for the night; and that these
      watchmen have a special care that no person go in or out of such
      infected houses whereof they have the charge, upon pain of severe
      punishment. And the said watchmen to do such further offices as
      the sick house shall need and require: and if the watchman be
      sent upon any business, to lock up the house and take the key
      with him; and the watchman by day to attend until ten of the
      clock at night, and the watchman by night until six in the
      morning.

      Searchers.

      ‘That there be a special care to appoint women searchers in every
      parish, such as are of honest reputation, and of the best sort as
      can be got in this kind; and these to be sworn to make due search
      and true report to the utmost of their knowledge whether the
      persons whose bodies they are appointed to search do die of the
      infection, or of what other diseases, as near as they can. And
      that the physicians who shall be appointed for cure and
      prevention of the infection do call before them the said
      searchers who are, or shall be, appointed for the several
      parishes under their respective cares, to the end they may
      consider whether they are fitly qualified for that employment,
      and charge them from time to time as they shall see cause, if
      they appear defective in their duties.

      ‘That no searcher during this time of visitation be permitted to
      use any public work or employment, or keep any shop or stall, or
      be employed as a laundress, or in any other common employment
      whatsoever.

      Chirurgeons.

      ‘For better assistance of the searchers, forasmuch as there hath
      been heretofore great abuse in misreporting the disease, to the
      further spreading of the infection, it is therefore ordered that
      there be chosen and appointed able and discreet chirurgeons,
      besides those that do already belong to the pest-house, amongst
      whom the city and Liberties to be quartered as the places lie
      most apt and convenient; and every of these to have one quarter
      for his limit; and the said chirurgeons in every of their limits
      to join with the searchers for the view of the body, to the end
      there may be a true report made of the disease.

      ‘And further, that the said chirurgeons shall visit and search
      such-like persons as shall either send for them or be named and
      directed unto them by the examiners of every parish, and inform
      themselves of the disease of the said parties.

      ‘And forasmuch as the said chirurgeons are to be sequestered from
      all other cures, and kept only to this disease of the infection,
      it is ordered that every of the said chirurgeons shall have
      twelve-pence a body searched by them, to be paid out of the goods
      of the party searched, if he be able, or otherwise by the parish.

      Nurse-keepers.

      ‘If any nurse-keeper shall remove herself out of any infected
      house before twenty-eight days after the decease of any person
      dying of the infection, the house to which the said nurse-keeper
      doth so remove herself shall be shut up until the said
      twenty-eight days be expired.’

      ORDERS CONCERNING INFECTED HOUSES AND PERSONS SICK OF THE PLAGUE.

      Notice to be given of the Sickness.

      ‘The master of every house, as soon as any one in his house
      complaineth, either of blotch or purple, or swelling in any part
      of his body, or falleth otherwise dangerously sick, without
      apparent cause of some other disease, shall give knowledge
      thereof to the examiner of health within two hours after the said
      sign shall appear.

      Sequestration of the Sick.

      ‘As soon as any man shall be found by this examiner, chirurgeon,
      or searcher to be sick of the plague, he shall the same night be
      sequestered in the same house; and in case he be so sequestered,
      then though he afterwards die not, the house wherein he sickened
      should be shut up for a month, after the use of the due
      preservatives taken by the rest.

      Airing the Stuff.

      ‘For sequestration of the goods and stuff of the infection, their
      bedding and apparel and hangings of chambers must be well aired
      with fire and such perfumes as are requisite within the infected
      house before they be taken again to use. This to be done by the
      appointment of an examiner.

      Shutting up of the House.

      ‘If any person shall have visited any man known to be infected of
      the plague, or entered willingly into any known infected house,
      being not allowed, the house wherein he inhabiteth shall be shut
      up for certain days by the examiner’s direction.

      None to be removed out of infected Houses, but, &C.

      ‘Item, that none be removed out of the house where he falleth
      sick of the infection into any other house in the city (except it
      be to the pest-house or a tent, or unto some such house which the
      owner of the said visited house holdeth in his own hands and
      occupieth by his own servants); and so as security be given to
      the parish whither such remove is made, that the attendance and
      charge about the said visited persons shall be observed and
      charged in all the particularities before expressed, without any
      cost of that parish to which any such remove shall happen to be
      made, and this remove to be done by night. And it shall be lawful
      to any person that hath two houses to remove either his sound or
      his infected people to his spare house at his choice, so as, if
      he send away first his sound, he not after send thither his sick,
      nor again unto the sick the sound; and that the same which he
      sendeth be for one week at the least shut up and secluded from
      company, for fear of some infection at the first not appearing.

      Burial of the Dead.

      ‘That the burial of the dead by this visitation be at most
      convenient hours, always either before sun-rising or after
      sun-setting, with the privity of the churchwardens or constable,
      and not otherwise; and that no neighbours nor friends be suffered
      to accompany the corpse to church, or to enter the house visited,
      upon pain of having his house shut up or be imprisoned.

      ‘And that no corpse dying of infection shall be buried, or remain
      in any church in time of common prayer, sermon, or lecture. And
      that no children be suffered at time of burial of any corpse in
      any church, churchyard, or burying-place to come near the corpse,
      coffin, or grave. And that all the graves shall be at least six
      feet deep.

      ‘And further, all public assemblies at other burials are to be
      foreborne during the continuance of this visitation.

      No infected Stuff to be uttered.

      ‘That no clothes, stuff, bedding, or garments be suffered to be
      carried or conveyed out of any infected houses, and that the
      criers and carriers abroad of bedding or old apparel to be sold
      or pawned be utterly prohibited and restrained, and no brokers of
      bedding or old apparel be permitted to make any outward show, or
      hang forth on their stalls, shop-boards, or windows, towards any
      street, lane, common way, or passage, any old bedding or apparel
      to be sold, upon pain of imprisonment. And if any broker or other
      person shall buy any bedding, apparel, or other stuff out of any
      infected house within two months after the infection hath been
      there, his house shall be shut up as infected, and so shall
      continue shut up twenty days at the least.

      No Person to be conveyed out of any infected House.

      ‘If any person visited do fortune, by negligent looking unto, or
      by any other means, to come or be conveyed from a place infected
      to any other place, the parish from whence such party hath come
      or been conveyed, upon notice thereof given, shall at their
      charge cause the said party so visited and escaped to be carried
      and brought back again by night, and the parties in this case
      offending to be punished at the direction of the alderman of the
      ward, and the house of the receiver of such visited person to be
      shut up for twenty days.

      Every visited House to be marked.

      ‘That every house visited be marked with a red cross of a foot
      long in the middle of the door, evident to be seen, and with
      these usual printed words, that is to say, “Lord, have mercy upon
      us,” to be set close over the same cross, there to continue until
      lawful opening of the same house.

      Every visited House to be watched.

      ‘That the constables see every house shut up, and to be attended
      with watchmen, which may keep them in, and minister necessaries
      unto them at their own charges, if they be able, or at the common
      charge, if they are unable; the shutting up to be for the space
      of four weeks after all be whole.

      ‘That precise order to be taken that the searchers, chirurgeons,
      keepers, and buriers are not to pass the streets without holding
      a red rod or wand of three feet in length in their hands, open
      and evident to be seen, and are not to go into any other house
      than into their own, or into that whereunto they are directed or
      sent for; but to forbear and abstain from company, especially
      when they have been lately used in any such business or
      attendance.

      Inmates.

      ‘That where several inmates are in one and the same house, and
      any person in that house happens to be infected, no other person
      or family of such house shall be suffered to remove him or
      themselves without a certificate from the examiners of health of
      that parish; or in default thereof, the house whither he or they
      so remove shall be shut up as in case of visitation.

      Hackney-Coaches.

      ‘That care be taken of hackney-coachmen, that they may not (as
      some of them have been observed to do after carrying of infected
      persons to the pest-house and other places) be admitted to common
      use till their coaches be well aired, and have stood unemployed
      by the space of five or six days after such service.’

      ORDERS FOR CLEANSING AND KEEPING OF THE STREETS SWEPT.

      The Streets to be kept Clean.

      ‘First, it is thought necessary, and so ordered, that every
      householder do cause the street to be daily prepared before his
      door, and so to keep it clean swept all the week long.

      That Rakers take it from out the Houses.

      ‘That the sweeping and filth of houses be daily carried away by
      the rakers, and that the raker shall give notice of his coming by
      the blowing of a horn, as hitherto hath been done.

      Laystalls to be made far off from the City.

      ‘That the laystalls be removed as far as may be out of the city
      and common passages, and that no nightman or other be suffered to
      empty a vault into any garden near about the city.

      Care to be had of unwholesome Fish or Flesh, and of musty Corn.

      ‘That special care be taken that no stinking fish, or unwholesome
      flesh, or musty corn, or other corrupt fruits of what sort
      soever, be suffered to be sold about the city, or any part of the
      same.

      ‘That the brewers and tippling-houses be looked into for musty
      and unwholesome casks.

      ‘That no hogs, dogs, or cats, or tame pigeons, or ponies, be
      suffered to be kept within any part of the city, or any swine to
      be or stray in the streets or lanes, but that such swine be
      impounded by the beadle or any other officer, and the owner
      punished according to Act of Common Council, and that the dogs be
      killed by the dog-killers appointed for that purpose.’

      ORDERS CONCERNING LOOSE PERSONS AND IDLE ASSEMBLIES.

      Beggars.

      ‘Forasmuch as nothing is more complained of than the multitude of
      rogues and wandering beggars that swarm in every place about the
      city, being a great cause of the spreading of the infection, and
      will not be avoided, notwithstanding any orders that have been
      given to the contrary: It is therefore now ordered, that such
      constables, and others whom this matter may any way concern, take
      special care that no wandering beggars be suffered in the streets
      of this city in any fashion or manner whatsoever, upon the
      penalty provided by the law, to be duly and severely executed
      upon them.

      Plays.

      ‘That all plays, bear-baitings, games, singing of ballads,
      buckler-play, or such-like causes of assemblies of people be
      utterly prohibited, and the parties offending severely punished
      by every alderman in his ward.

      Feasting prohibited.

      ‘That all public feasting, and particularly by the companies of
      this city, and dinners at taverns, ale-houses, and other places
      of common entertainment, be forborne till further order and
      allowance; and that the money thereby spared be preserved and
      employed for the benefit and relief of the poor visited with the
      infection.

      Tippling-houses.

      ‘That disorderly tippling in taverns, ale-houses, coffee-houses,
      and cellars be severely looked unto, as the common sin of this
      time and greatest occasion of dispersing the plague. And that no
      company or person be suffered to remain or come into any tavern,
      ale-house, or coffee-house to drink after nine of the clock in
      the evening, according to the ancient law and custom of this
      city, upon the penalties ordained in that behalf.

      ‘And for the better execution of these orders, and such other
      rules and directions as, upon further consideration, shall be
      found needful: It is ordered and enjoined that the aldermen,
      deputies, and common councilmen shall meet together weekly, once,
      twice, thrice or oftener (as cause shall require), at some one
      general place accustomed in their respective wards (being clear
      from infection of the plague), to consult how the said orders may
      be duly put in execution; not intending that any dwelling in or
      near places infected shall come to the said meeting while their
      coming may be doubtful. And the said aldermen, and deputies, and
      common councilmen in their several wards may put in execution any
      other good orders that by them at their said meetings shall be
      conceived and devised for preservation of his Majesty’s subjects
      from the infection.

      ‘SIR JOHN LAWRENCE, Lord Mayor.
      SIR GEORGE WATERMAN
      SIR CHARLES
      DOE, Sheriffs.’

      I need not say that these orders extended only to such places as
      were within the Lord Mayor’s jurisdiction, so it is requisite to
      observe that the justices of Peace within those parishes and
      places as were called the Hamlets and out-parts took the same
      method. As I remember, the orders for shutting up of houses did
      not take Place so soon on our side, because, as I said before,
      the plague did not reach to these eastern parts of the town at
      least, nor begin to be very violent, till the beginning of
      August. For example, the whole bill from the 11th to the 18th of
      July was 1761, yet there died but 71 of the plague in all those
      parishes we call the Tower Hamlets, and they were as follows:—

-                           The next week   And to the 1st
     -                             was thus:     of Aug. thus:
     Aldgate               14          34               65
     Stepney               33          58               76
     Whitechappel          21          48               79
     St Katherine, Tower    2           4                4
     Trinity, Minories      1           1                4
     -                    —-         —-              —-
     -                     71         145              228

      It was indeed coming on amain, for the burials that same week
      were in the next adjoining parishes thus:—

-                                The next week
     -                                prodigiously    To the 1st of
     -                                increased, as:   Aug. thus:
     St Leonard’s, Shoreditch      64       84          110
     St Botolph’s, Bishopsgate     65      105          116
     St Giles’s, Cripplegate      213      421          554
     -                            —-      —-          —-
     -                            342      610          780

      This shutting up of houses was at first counted a very cruel and
      unchristian method, and the poor people so confined made bitter
      lamentations. Complaints of the severity of it were also daily
      brought to my Lord Mayor, of houses causelessly (and some
      maliciously) shut up. I cannot say; but upon inquiry many that
      complained so loudly were found in a condition to be continued;
      and others again, inspection being made upon the sick person, and
      the sickness not appearing infectious, or if uncertain, yet on
      his being content to be carried to the pest-house, were released.

      It is true that the locking up the doors of people’s houses, and
      setting a watchman there night and day to prevent their stirring
      out or any coming to them, when perhaps the sound people in the
      family might have escaped if they had been removed from the sick,
      looked very hard and cruel; and many people perished in these
      miserable confinements which, ’tis reasonable to believe, would
      not have been distempered if they had had liberty, though the
      plague was in the house; at which the people were very clamorous
      and uneasy at first, and several violences were committed and
      injuries offered to the men who were set to watch the houses so
      shut up; also several people broke out by force in many places,
      as I shall observe by-and-by. But it was a public good that
      justified the private mischief, and there was no obtaining the
      least mitigation by any application to magistrates or government
      at that time, at least not that I heard of. This put the people
      upon all manner of stratagem in order, if possible, to get out;
      and it would fill a little volume to set down the arts used by
      the people of such houses to shut the eyes of the watchmen who
      were employed, to deceive them, and to escape or break out from
      them, in which frequent scuffles and some mischief happened; of
      which by itself.

      As I went along Houndsditch one morning about eight o’clock there
      was a great noise. It is true, indeed, there was not much crowd,
      because people were not very free to gather together, or to stay
      long together when they were there; nor did I stay long there.
      But the outcry was loud enough to prompt my curiosity, and I
      called to one that looked out of a window, and asked what was the
      matter.

      A watchman, it seems, had been employed to keep his post at the
      door of a house which was infected, or said to be infected, and
      was shut up. He had been there all night for two nights together,
      as he told his story, and the day-watchman had been there one
      day, and was now come to relieve him. All this while no noise had
      been heard in the house, no light had been seen; they called for
      nothing, sent him of no errands, which used to be the chief
      business of the watchmen; neither had they given him any
      disturbance, as he said, from the Monday afternoon, when he heard
      great crying and screaming in the house, which, as he supposed,
      was occasioned by some of the family dying just at that time. It
      seems, the night before, the dead-cart, as it was called, had
      been stopped there, and a servant-maid had been brought down to
      the door dead, and the buriers or bearers, as they were called,
      put her into the cart, wrapt only in a green rug, and carried her
      away.

      The watchman had knocked at the door, it seems, when he heard
      that noise and crying, as above, and nobody answered a great
      while; but at last one looked out and said with an angry, quick
      tone, and yet a kind of crying voice, or a voice of one that was
      crying, ‘What d’ye want, that ye make such a knocking?’ He
      answered, ‘I am the watchman! How do you do? What is the matter?’
      The person answered, ‘What is that to you? Stop the dead-cart.’
      This, it seems, was about one o’clock. Soon after, as the fellow
      said, he stopped the dead-cart, and then knocked again, but
      nobody answered. He continued knocking, and the bellman called
      out several times, ‘Bring out your dead’; but nobody answered,
      till the man that drove the cart, being called to other houses,
      would stay no longer, and drove away.

      The watchman knew not what to make of all this, so he let them
      alone till the morning-man or day-watchman, as they called him,
      came to relieve him. Giving him an account of the particulars,
      they knocked at the door a great while, but nobody answered; and
      they observed that the window or casement at which the person had
      looked out who had answered before continued open, being up two
      pair of stairs.

      Upon this the two men, to satisfy their curiosity, got a long
      ladder, and one of them went up to the window and looked into the
      room, where he saw a woman lying dead upon the floor in a dismal
      manner, having no clothes on her but her shift. But though he
      called aloud, and putting in his long staff, knocked hard on the
      floor, yet nobody stirred or answered; neither could he hear any
      noise in the house.

      He came down again upon this, and acquainted his fellow, who went
      up also; and finding it just so, they resolved to acquaint either
      the Lord Mayor or some other magistrate of it, but did not offer
      to go in at the window. The magistrate, it seems, upon the
      information of the two men, ordered the house to be broke open, a
      constable and other persons being appointed to be present, that
      nothing might be plundered; and accordingly it was so done, when
      nobody was found in the house but that young woman, who having
      been infected and past recovery, the rest had left her to die by
      herself, and were every one gone, having found some way to delude
      the watchman, and to get open the door, or get out at some
      back-door, or over the tops of the houses, so that he knew
      nothing of it; and as to those cries and shrieks which he heard,
      it was supposed they were the passionate cries of the family at
      the bitter parting, which, to be sure, it was to them all, this
      being the sister to the mistress of the family. The man of the
      house, his wife, several children, and servants, being all gone
      and fled, whether sick or sound, that I could never learn; nor,
      indeed, did I make much inquiry after it.

      Many such escapes were made out of infected houses, as
      particularly when the watchman was sent of some errand; for it
      was his business to go of any errand that the family sent him of;
      that is to say, for necessaries, such as food and physic; to
      fetch physicians, if they would come, or surgeons, or nurses, or
      to order the dead-cart, and the like; but with this condition,
      too, that when he went he was to lock up the outer door of the
      house and take the key away with him, To evade this, and cheat
      the watchmen, people got two or three keys made to their locks,
      or they found ways to unscrew the locks such as were screwed on,
      and so take off the lock, being in the inside of the house, and
      while they sent away the watchman to the market, to the
      bakehouse, or for one trifle or another, open the door and go out
      as often as they pleased. But this being found out, the officers
      afterwards had orders to padlock up the doors on the outside, and
      place bolts on them as they thought fit.

      At another house, as I was informed, in the street next within
      Aldgate, a whole family was shut up and locked in because the
      maid-servant was taken sick. The master of the house had
      complained by his friends to the next alderman and to the Lord
      Mayor, and had consented to have the maid carried to the
      pest-house, but was refused; so the door was marked with a red
      cross, a padlock on the outside, as above, and a watchman set to
      keep the door, according to public order.

      After the master of the house found there was no remedy, but that
      he, his wife, and his children were to be locked up with this
      poor distempered servant, he called to the watchman, and told him
      he must go then and fetch a nurse for them to attend this poor
      girl, for that it would be certain death to them all to oblige
      them to nurse her; and told him plainly that if he would not do
      this, the maid must perish either of the distemper or be starved
      for want of food, for he was resolved none of his family should
      go near her; and she lay in the garret four storey high, where
      she could not cry out, or call to anybody for help.

      The watchman consented to that, and went and fetched a nurse, as
      he was appointed, and brought her to them the same evening.
      During this interval the master of the house took his opportunity
      to break a large hole through his shop into a bulk or stall,
      where formerly a cobbler had sat, before or under his
      shop-window; but the tenant, as may be supposed at such a dismal
      time as that, was dead or removed, and so he had the key in his
      own keeping. Having made his way into this stall, which he could
      not have done if the man had been at the door, the noise he was
      obliged to make being such as would have alarmed the watchman; I
      say, having made his way into this stall, he sat still till the
      watchman returned with the nurse, and all the next day also. But
      the night following, having contrived to send the watchman of
      another trifling errand, which, as I take it, was to an
      apothecary’s for a plaister for the maid, which he was to stay
      for the making up, or some other such errand that might secure
      his staying some time; in that time he conveyed himself and all
      his family out of the house, and left the nurse and the watchman
      to bury the poor wench—that is, throw her into the cart—and take
      care of the house.

      I could give a great many such stories as these, diverting
      enough, which in the long course of that dismal year I met
      with—that is, heard of—and which are very certain to be true, or
      very near the truth; that is to say, true in the general: for no
      man could at such a time learn all the particulars. There was
      likewise violence used with the watchmen, as was reported, in
      abundance of places; and I believe that from the beginning of the
      visitation to the end, there was not less than eighteen or twenty
      of them killed, or so wounded as to be taken up for dead, which
      was supposed to be done by the people in the infected houses
      which were shut up, and where they attempted to come out and were
      opposed.

      Nor, indeed, could less be expected, for here were so many
      prisons in the town as there were houses shut up; and as the
      people shut up or imprisoned so were guilty of no crime, only
      shut up because miserable, it was really the more intolerable to
      them.

      It had also this difference, that every prison, as we may call
      it, had but one jailer, and as he had the whole house to guard,
      and that many houses were so situated as that they had several
      ways out, some more, some less, and some into several streets, it
      was impossible for one man so to guard all the passages as to
      prevent the escape of people made desperate by the fright of
      their circumstances, by the resentment of their usage, or by the
      raging of the distemper itself; so that they would talk to the
      watchman on one side of the house, while the family made their
      escape at another.

      For example, in Coleman Street there are abundance of alleys, as
      appears still. A house was shut up in that they call White’s
      Alley; and this house had a back-window, not a door, into a court
      which had a passage into Bell Alley. A watchman was set by the
      constable at the door of this house, and there he stood, or his
      comrade, night and day, while the family went all away in the
      evening out at that window into the court, and left the poor
      fellows warding and watching for near a fortnight.

      Not far from the same place they blew up a watchman with
      gunpowder, and burned the poor fellow dreadfully; and while he
      made hideous cries, and nobody would venture to come near to help
      him, the whole family that were able to stir got out at the
      windows one storey high, two that were left sick calling out for
      help. Care was taken to give them nurses to look after them, but
      the persons fled were never found, till after the plague was
      abated they returned; but as nothing could be proved, so nothing
      could be done to them.

      It is to be considered, too, that as these were prisons without
      bars and bolts, which our common prisons are furnished with, so
      the people let themselves down out of their windows, even in the
      face of the watchman, bringing swords or pistols in their hands,
      and threatening the poor wretch to shoot him if he stirred or
      called for help.

      In other cases, some had gardens, and walls or pales, between
      them and their neighbours, or yards and back-houses; and these,
      by friendship and entreaties, would get leave to get over those
      walls or pales, and so go out at their neighbours’ doors; or, by
      giving money to their servants, get them to let them through in
      the night; so that in short, the shutting up of houses was in no
      wise to be depended upon. Neither did it answer the end at all,
      serving more to make the people desperate, and drive them to such
      extremities as that they would break out at all adventures.

      And that which was still worse, those that did thus break out
      spread the infection farther by their wandering about with the
      distemper upon them, in their desperate circumstances, than they
      would otherwise have done; for whoever considers all the
      particulars in such cases must acknowledge, and we cannot doubt
      but the severity of those confinements made many people
      desperate, and made them run out of their houses at all hazards,
      and with the plague visibly upon them, not knowing either whither
      to go or what to do, or, indeed, what they did; and many that did
      so were driven to dreadful exigencies and extremities, and
      perished in the streets or fields for mere want, or dropped down
      by the raging violence of the fever upon them. Others wandered
      into the country, and went forward any way, as their desperation
      guided them, not knowing whither they went or would go: till,
      faint and tired, and not getting any relief, the houses and
      villages on the road refusing to admit them to lodge whether
      infected or no, they have perished by the roadside or gotten into
      barns and died there, none daring to come to them or relieve
      them, though perhaps not infected, for nobody would believe them.

      On the other hand, when the plague at first seized a family that
      is to say, when any body of the family had gone out and unwarily
      or otherwise catched the distemper and brought it home—it was
      certainly known by the family before it was known to the
      officers, who, as you will see by the order, were appointed to
      examine into the circumstances of all sick persons when they
      heard of their being sick.

      In this interval, between their being taken sick and the
      examiners coming, the master of the house had leisure and liberty
      to remove himself or all his family, if he knew whither to go,
      and many did so. But the great disaster was that many did thus
      after they were really infected themselves, and so carried the
      disease into the houses of those who were so hospitable as to
      receive them; which, it must be confessed, was very cruel and
      ungrateful.

      And this was in part the reason of the general notion, or scandal
      rather, which went about of the temper of people infected:
      namely, that they did not take the least care or make any scruple
      of infecting others, though I cannot say but there might be some
      truth in it too, but not so general as was reported. What natural
      reason could be given for so wicked a thing at a time when they
      might conclude themselves just going to appear at the bar of
      Divine justice I know not. I am very well satisfied that it
      cannot be reconciled to religion and principle any more than it
      can be to generosity and Humanity, but I may speak of that again.

      I am speaking now of people made desperate by the apprehensions
      of their being shut up, and their breaking out by stratagem or
      force, either before or after they were shut up, whose misery was
      not lessened when they were out, but sadly increased. On the
      other hand, many that thus got away had retreats to go to and
      other houses, where they locked themselves up and kept hid till
      the plague was over; and many families, foreseeing the approach
      of the distemper, laid up stores of provisions sufficient for
      their whole families, and shut themselves up, and that so
      entirely that they were neither seen or heard of till the
      infection was quite ceased, and then came abroad sound and well.
      I might recollect several such as these, and give you the
      particulars of their management; for doubtless it was the most
      effectual secure step that could be taken for such whose
      circumstances would not admit them to remove, or who had not
      retreats abroad proper for the case; for in being thus shut up
      they were as if they had been a hundred miles off. Nor do I
      remember that any one of those families miscarried. Among these,
      several Dutch merchants were particularly remarkable, who kept
      their houses like little garrisons besieged suffering none to go
      in or out or come near them, particularly one in a court in
      Throgmorton Street whose house looked into Draper’s Garden.

      But I come back to the case of families infected and shut up by
      the magistrates. The misery of those families is not to be
      expressed; and it was generally in such houses that we heard the
      most dismal shrieks and outcries of the poor people, terrified
      and even frighted to death by the sight of the condition of their
      dearest relations, and by the terror of being imprisoned as they
      were.

      I remember, and while I am writing this story I think I hear the
      very sound of it, a certain lady had an only daughter, a young
      maiden about nineteen years old, and who was possessed of a very
      considerable fortune. They were only lodgers in the house where
      they were. The young woman, her mother, and the maid had been
      abroad on some occasion, I do not remember what, for the house
      was not shut up; but about two hours after they came home the
      young lady complained she was not well; in a quarter of an hour
      more she vomited and had a violent pain in her head. ‘Pray God’,
      says her mother, in a terrible fright, ‘my child has not the
      distemper!’ The pain in her head increasing, her mother ordered
      the bed to be warmed, and resolved to put her to bed, and
      prepared to give her things to sweat, which was the ordinary
      remedy to be taken when the first apprehensions of the distemper
      began.

      While the bed was airing the mother undressed the young woman,
      and just as she was laid down in the bed, she, looking upon her
      body with a candle, immediately discovered the fatal tokens on
      the inside of her thighs. Her mother, not being able to contain
      herself, threw down her candle and shrieked out in such a
      frightful manner that it was enough to place horror upon the
      stoutest heart in the world; nor was it one scream or one cry,
      but the fright having seized her spirits, she—fainted first, then
      recovered, then ran all over the house, up the stairs and down
      the stairs, like one distracted, and indeed really was
      distracted, and continued screeching and crying out for several
      hours void of all sense, or at least government of her senses,
      and, as I was told, never came thoroughly to herself again. As to
      the young maiden, she was a dead corpse from that moment, for the
      gangrene which occasions the spots had spread [over] her whole
      body, and she died in less than two hours. But still the mother
      continued crying out, not knowing anything more of her child,
      several hours after she was dead. It is so long ago that I am not
      certain, but I think the mother never recovered, but died in two
      or three weeks after.

      This was an extraordinary case, and I am therefore the more
      particular in it, because I came so much to the knowledge of it;
      but there were innumerable such-like cases, and it was seldom
      that the weekly bill came in but there were two or three put in,
      ‘frighted’; that is, that may well be called frighted to death.
      But besides those who were so frighted as to die upon the spot,
      there were great numbers frighted to other extremes, some
      frighted out of their senses, some out of their memory, and some
      out of their understanding. But I return to the shutting up of
      houses.

      As several people, I say, got out of their houses by stratagem
      after they were shut up, so others got out by bribing the
      watchmen, and giving them money to let them go privately out in
      the night. I must confess I thought it at that time the most
      innocent corruption or bribery that any man could be guilty of,
      and therefore could not but pity the poor men, and think it was
      hard when three of those watchmen were publicly whipped through
      the streets for suffering people to go out of houses shut up.

      But notwithstanding that severity, money prevailed with the poor
      men, and many families found means to make sallies out, and
      escape that way after they had been shut up; but these were
      generally such as had some places to retire to; and though there
      was no easy passing the roads any whither after the 1st of
      August, yet there were many ways of retreat, and particularly, as
      I hinted, some got tents and set them up in the fields, carrying
      beds or straw to lie on, and provisions to eat, and so lived in
      them as hermits in a cell, for nobody would venture to come near
      them; and several stories were told of such, some comical, some
      tragical, some who lived like wandering pilgrims in the deserts,
      and escaped by making themselves exiles in such a manner as is
      scarce to be credited, and who yet enjoyed more liberty than was
      to be expected in such cases.

      I have by me a story of two brothers and their kinsman, who being
      single men, but that had stayed in the city too long to get away,
      and indeed not knowing where to go to have any retreat, nor
      having wherewith to travel far, took a course for their own
      preservation, which though in itself at first desperate, yet was
      so natural that it may be wondered that no more did so at that
      time. They were but of mean condition, and yet not so very poor
      as that they could not furnish themselves with some little
      conveniences such as might serve to keep life and soul together;
      and finding the distemper increasing in a terrible manner, they
      resolved to shift as well as they could, and to be gone.

      One of them had been a soldier in the late wars, and before that
      in the Low Countries, and having been bred to no particular
      employment but his arms, and besides being wounded, and not able
      to work very hard, had for some time been employed at a baker’s
      of sea-biscuit in Wapping.

      The brother of this man was a seaman too, but somehow or other
      had been hurt of one leg, that he could not go to sea, but had
      worked for his living at a sailmaker’s in Wapping, or
      thereabouts; and being a good husband, had laid up some money,
      and was the richest of the three.

      The third man was a joiner or carpenter by trade, a handy fellow,
      and he had no wealth but his box or basket of tools, with the
      help of which he could at any time get his living, such a time as
      this excepted, wherever he went—and he lived near Shadwell.

      They all lived in Stepney parish, which, as I have said, being
      the last that was infected, or at least violently, they stayed
      there till they evidently saw the plague was abating at the west
      part of the town, and coming towards the east, where they lived.

      The story of those three men, if the reader will be content to
      have me give it in their own persons, without taking upon me to
      either vouch the particulars or answer for any mistakes, I shall
      give as distinctly as I can, believing the history will be a very
      good pattern for any poor man to follow, in case the like public
      desolation should happen here; and if there may be no such
      occasion, which God of His infinite mercy grant us, still the
      story may have its uses so many ways as that it will, I hope,
      never be said that the relating has been unprofitable.

      I say all this previous to the history, having yet, for the
      present, much more to say before I quit my own part.

      I went all the first part of the time freely about the streets,
      though not so freely as to run myself into apparent danger,
      except when they dug the great pit in the churchyard of our
      parish of Aldgate. A terrible pit it was, and I could not resist
      my curiosity to go and see it. As near as I may judge, it was
      about forty feet in length, and about fifteen or sixteen feet
      broad, and at the time I first looked at it, about nine feet
      deep; but it was said they dug it near twenty feet deep
      afterwards in one part of it, till they could go no deeper for
      the water; for they had, it seems, dug several large pits before
      this. For though the plague was long a-coming to our parish, yet,
      when it did come, there was no parish in or about London where it
      raged with such violence as in the two parishes of Aldgate and
      Whitechappel.

      I say they had dug several pits in another ground, when the
      distemper began to spread in our parish, and especially when the
      dead-carts began to go about, which was not, in our parish, till
      the beginning of August. Into these pits they had put perhaps
      fifty or sixty bodies each; then they made larger holes wherein
      they buried all that the cart brought in a week, which, by the
      middle to the end of August, came to from 200 to 400 a week; and
      they could not well dig them larger, because of the order of the
      magistrates confining them to leave no bodies within six feet of
      the surface; and the water coming on at about seventeen or
      eighteen feet, they could not well, I say, put more in one pit.
      But now, at the beginning of September, the plague raging in a
      dreadful manner, and the number of burials in our parish
      increasing to more than was ever buried in any parish about
      London of no larger extent, they ordered this dreadful gulf to be
      dug—for such it was, rather than a pit.

      They had supposed this pit would have supplied them for a month
      or more when they dug it, and some blamed the churchwardens for
      suffering such a frightful thing, telling them they were making
      preparations to bury the whole parish, and the like; but time
      made it appear the churchwardens knew the condition of the parish
      better than they did: for, the pit being finished the 4th of
      September, I think, they began to bury in it the 6th, and by the
      20th, which was just two weeks, they had thrown into it 1114
      bodies when they were obliged to fill it up, the bodies being
      then come to lie within six feet of the surface. I doubt not but
      there may be some ancient persons alive in the parish who can
      justify the fact of this, and are able to show even in what place
      of the churchyard the pit lay better than I can. The mark of it
      also was many years to be seen in the churchyard on the surface,
      lying in length parallel with the passage which goes by the west
      wall of the churchyard out of Houndsditch, and turns east again
      into Whitechappel, coming out near the Three Nuns’ Inn.

      It was about the 10th of September that my curiosity led, or
      rather drove, me to go and see this pit again, when there had
      been near 400 people buried in it; and I was not content to see
      it in the day-time, as I had done before, for then there would
      have been nothing to have been seen but the loose earth; for all
      the bodies that were thrown in were immediately covered with
      earth by those they called the buriers, which at other times were
      called bearers; but I resolved to go in the night and see some of
      them thrown in.

      There was a strict order to prevent people coming to those pits,
      and that was only to prevent infection. But after some time that
      order was more necessary, for people that were infected and near
      their end, and delirious also, would run to those pits, wrapt in
      blankets or rugs, and throw themselves in, and, as they said,
      bury themselves. I cannot say that the officers suffered any
      willingly to lie there; but I have heard that in a great pit in
      Finsbury, in the parish of Cripplegate, it lying open then to the
      fields, for it was not then walled about, [many] came and threw
      themselves in, and expired there, before they threw any earth
      upon them; and that when they came to bury others and found them
      there, they were quite dead, though not cold.

      This may serve a little to describe the dreadful condition of
      that day, though it is impossible to say anything that is able to
      give a true idea of it to those who did not see it, other than
      this, that it was indeed very, very, very dreadful, and such as
      no tongue can express.

      I got admittance into the churchyard by being acquainted with the
      sexton who attended; who, though he did not refuse me at all, yet
      earnestly persuaded me not to go, telling me very seriously (for
      he was a good, religious, and sensible man) that it was indeed
      their business and duty to venture, and to run all hazards, and
      that in it they might hope to be preserved; but that I had no
      apparent call to it but my own curiosity, which, he said, he
      believed I would not pretend was sufficient to justify my running
      that hazard. I told him I had been pressed in my mind to go, and
      that perhaps it might be an instructing sight, that might not be
      without its uses. ‘Nay,’ says the good man, ‘if you will venture
      upon that score, name of God go in; for, depend upon it, ’twill
      be a sermon to you, it may be, the best that ever you heard in
      your life. ’Tis a speaking sight,’ says he, ‘and has a voice with
      it, and a loud one, to call us all to repentance’; and with that
      he opened the door and said, ‘Go, if you will.’

      His discourse had shocked my resolution a little, and I stood
      wavering for a good while, but just at that interval I saw two
      links come over from the end of the Minories, and heard the
      bellman, and then appeared a dead-cart, as they called it, coming
      over the streets; so I could no longer resist my desire of seeing
      it, and went in. There was nobody, as I could perceive at first,
      in the churchyard, or going into it, but the buriers and the
      fellow that drove the cart, or rather led the horse and cart; but
      when they came up to the pit they saw a man go to and again,
      muffled up in a brown Cloak, and making motions with his hands
      under his cloak, as if he was in great agony, and the buriers
      immediately gathered about him, supposing he was one of those
      poor delirious or desperate creatures that used to pretend, as I
      have said, to bury themselves. He said nothing as he walked
      about, but two or three times groaned very deeply and loud, and
      sighed as he would break his heart.

      When the buriers came up to him they soon found he was neither a
      person infected and desperate, as I have observed above, or a
      person distempered—in mind, but one oppressed with a dreadful
      weight of grief indeed, having his wife and several of his
      children all in the cart that was just come in with him, and he
      followed in an agony and excess of sorrow. He mourned heartily,
      as it was easy to see, but with a kind of masculine grief that
      could not give itself vent by tears; and calmly defying the
      buriers to let him alone, said he would only see the bodies
      thrown in and go away, so they left importuning him. But no
      sooner was the cart turned round and the bodies shot into the pit
      promiscuously, which was a surprise to him, for he at least
      expected they would have been decently laid in, though indeed he
      was afterwards convinced that was impracticable; I say, no sooner
      did he see the sight but he cried out aloud, unable to contain
      himself. I could not hear what he said, but he went backward two
      or three steps and fell down in a swoon. The buriers ran to him
      and took him up, and in a little while he came to himself, and
      they led him away to the Pie Tavern over against the end of
      Houndsditch, where, it seems, the man was known, and where they
      took care of him. He looked into the pit again as he went away,
      but the buriers had covered the bodies so immediately with
      throwing in earth, that though there was light enough, for there
      were lanterns, and candles in them, placed all night round the
      sides of the pit, upon heaps of earth, seven or eight, or perhaps
      more, yet nothing could be seen.

      This was a mournful scene indeed, and affected me almost as much
      as the rest; but the other was awful and full of terror. The cart
      had in it sixteen or seventeen bodies; some were wrapt up in
      linen sheets, some in rags, some little other than naked, or so
      loose that what covering they had fell from them in the shooting
      out of the cart, and they fell quite naked among the rest; but
      the matter was not much to them, or the indecency much to any one
      else, seeing they were all dead, and were to be huddled together
      into the common grave of mankind, as we may call it, for here was
      no difference made, but poor and rich went together; there was no
      other way of burials, neither was it possible there should, for
      coffins were not to be had for the prodigious numbers that fell
      in such a calamity as this.

      It was reported by way of scandal upon the buriers, that if any
      corpse was delivered to them decently wound up, as we called it
      then, in a winding-sheet tied over the head and feet, which some
      did, and which was generally of good linen; I say, it was
      reported that the buriers were so wicked as to strip them in the
      cart and carry them quite naked to the ground. But as I cannot
      easily credit anything so vile among Christians, and at a time so
      filled with terrors as that was, I can only relate it and leave
      it undetermined.

      Innumerable stories also went about of the cruel behaviours and
      practices of nurses who tended the sick, and of their hastening
      on the fate of those they tended in their sickness. But I shall
      say more of this in its place.

      I was indeed shocked with this sight; it almost overwhelmed me,
      and I went away with my heart most afflicted, and full of the
      afflicting thoughts, such as I cannot describe just at my going
      out of the church, and turning up the street towards my own
      house, I saw another cart with links, and a bellman going before,
      coming out of Harrow Alley in the Butcher Row, on the other side
      of the way, and being, as I perceived, very full of dead bodies,
      it went directly over the street also toward the church. I stood
      a while, but I had no stomach to go back again to see the same
      dismal scene over again, so I went directly home, where I could
      not but consider with thankfulness the risk I had run, believing
      I had gotten no injury, as indeed I had not.

      Here the poor unhappy gentleman’s grief came into my head again,
      and indeed I could not but shed tears in the reflection upon it,
      perhaps more than he did himself; but his case lay so heavy upon
      my mind that I could not prevail with myself, but that I must go
      out again into the street, and go to the Pie Tavern, resolving to
      inquire what became of him.

      It was by this time one o’clock in the morning, and yet the poor
      gentleman was there. The truth was, the people of the house,
      knowing him, had entertained him, and kept him there all the
      night, notwithstanding the danger of being infected by him,
      though it appeared the man was perfectly sound himself.

      It is with regret that I take notice of this tavern. The people
      were civil, mannerly, and an obliging sort of folks enough, and
      had till this time kept their house open and their trade going
      on, though not so very publicly as formerly: but there was a
      dreadful set of fellows that used their house, and who, in the
      middle of all this horror, met there every night, behaved with
      all the revelling and roaring extravagances as is usual for such
      people to do at other times, and, indeed, to such an offensive
      degree that the very master and mistress of the house grew first
      ashamed and then terrified at them.

      They sat generally in a room next the street, and as they always
      kept late hours, so when the dead-cart came across the street-end
      to go into Houndsditch, which was in view of the tavern windows,
      they would frequently open the windows as soon as they heard the
      bell and look out at them; and as they might often hear sad
      lamentations of people in the streets or at their windows as the
      carts went along, they would make their impudent mocks and jeers
      at them, especially if they heard the poor people call upon God
      to have mercy upon them, as many would do at those times in their
      ordinary passing along the streets.

      These gentlemen, being something disturbed with the clutter of
      bringing the poor gentleman into the house, as above, were first
      angry and very high with the master of the house for suffering
      such a fellow, as they called him, to be brought out of the grave
      into their house; but being answered that the man was a
      neighbour, and that he was sound, but overwhelmed with the
      calamity of his family, and the like, they turned their anger
      into ridiculing the man and his sorrow for his wife and children,
      taunted him with want of courage to leap into the great pit and
      go to heaven, as they jeeringly expressed it, along with them,
      adding some very profane and even blasphemous expressions.

      They were at this vile work when I came back to the house, and,
      as far as I could see, though the man sat still, mute and
      disconsolate, and their affronts could not divert his sorrow, yet
      he was both grieved and offended at their discourse. Upon this I
      gently reproved them, being well enough acquainted with their
      characters, and not unknown in person to two of them.

      They immediately fell upon me with ill language and oaths, asked
      me what I did out of my grave at such a time when so many
      honester men were carried into the churchyard, and why I was not
      at home saying my prayers against the dead-cart came for me, and
      the like.

      I was indeed astonished at the impudence of the men, though not
      at all discomposed at their treatment of me. However, I kept my
      temper. I told them that though I defied them or any man in the
      world to tax me with any dishonesty, yet I acknowledged that in
      this terrible judgement of God many better than I were swept away
      and carried to their grave. But to answer their question
      directly, the case was, that I was mercifully preserved by that
      great God whose name they had blasphemed and taken in vain by
      cursing and swearing in a dreadful manner, and that I believed I
      was preserved in particular, among other ends of His goodness,
      that I might reprove them for their audacious boldness in
      behaving in such a manner and in such an awful time as this was,
      especially for their jeering and mocking at an honest gentleman
      and a neighbour (for some of them knew him), who, they saw, was
      overwhelmed with sorrow for the breaches which it had pleased God
      to make upon his family.

      I cannot call exactly to mind the hellish, abominable raillery
      which was the return they made to that talk of mine: being
      provoked, it seems, that I was not at all afraid to be free with
      them; nor, if I could remember, would I fill my account with any
      of the words, the horrid oaths, curses, and vile expressions,
      such as, at that time of the day, even the worst and ordinariest
      people in the street would not use; for, except such hardened
      creatures as these, the most wicked wretches that could be found
      had at that time some terror upon their minds of the hand of that
      Power which could thus in a moment destroy them.

      But that which was the worst in all their devilish language was,
      that they were not afraid to blaspheme God and talk
      atheistically, making a jest of my calling the plague the hand of
      God; mocking, and even laughing, at the word judgement, as if the
      providence of God had no concern in the inflicting such a
      desolating stroke; and that the people calling upon God as they
      saw the carts carrying away the dead bodies was all enthusiastic,
      absurd, and impertinent.

      I made them some reply, such as I thought proper, but which I
      found was so far from putting a check to their horrid way of
      speaking that it made them rail the more, so that I confess it
      filled me with horror and a kind of rage, and I came away, as I
      told them, lest the hand of that judgement which had visited the
      whole city should glorify His vengeance upon them, and all that
      were near them.

      They received all reproof with the utmost contempt, and made the
      greatest mockery that was possible for them to do at me, giving
      me all the opprobrious, insolent scoffs that they could think of
      for preaching to them, as they called it, which indeed grieved
      me, rather than angered me; and I went away, blessing God,
      however, in my mind that I had not spared them, though they had
      insulted me so much.

      They continued this wretched course three or four days after
      this, continually mocking and jeering at all that showed
      themselves religious or serious, or that were any way touched
      with the sense of the terrible judgement of God upon us; and I
      was informed they flouted in the same manner at the good people
      who, notwithstanding the contagion, met at the church, fasted,
      and prayed to God to remove His hand from them.

      I say, they continued this dreadful course three or four days—I
      think it was no more—when one of them, particularly he who asked
      the poor gentleman what he did out of his grave, was struck from
      Heaven with the plague, and died in a most deplorable manner;
      and, in a word, they were every one of them carried into the
      great pit which I have mentioned above, before it was quite
      filled up, which was not above a fortnight or thereabout.

      These men were guilty of many extravagances, such as one would
      think human nature should have trembled at the thoughts of at
      such a time of general terror as was then upon us, and
      particularly scoffing and mocking at everything which they
      happened to see that was religious among the people, especially
      at their thronging zealously to the place of public worship to
      implore mercy from Heaven in such a time of distress; and this
      tavern where they held their dub being within view of the
      church-door, they had the more particular occasion for their
      atheistical profane mirth.

      But this began to abate a little with them before the accident
      which I have related happened, for the infection increased so
      violently at this part of the town now, that people began to be
      afraid to come to the church; at least such numbers did not
      resort thither as was usual. Many of the clergymen likewise were
      dead, and others gone into the country; for it really required a
      steady courage and a strong faith for a man not only to venture
      being in town at such a time as this, but likewise to venture to
      come to church and perform the office of a minister to a
      congregation, of whom he had reason to believe many of them were
      actually infected with the plague, and to do this every day, or
      twice a day, as in some places was done.

      It is true the people showed an extraordinary zeal in these
      religious exercises, and as the church-doors were always open,
      people would go in single at all times, whether the minister was
      officiating or no, and locking themselves into separate pews,
      would be praying to God with great fervency and devotion.

      Others assembled at meeting-houses, every one as their different
      opinions in such things guided, but all were promiscuously the
      subject of these men’s drollery, especially at the beginning of
      the visitation.

      It seems they had been checked for their open insulting religion
      in this manner by several good people of every persuasion, and
      that, and the violent raging of the infection, I suppose, was the
      occasion that they had abated much of their rudeness for some
      time before, and were only roused by the spirit of ribaldry and
      atheism at the clamour which was made when the gentleman was
      first brought in there, and perhaps were agitated by the same
      devil, when I took upon me to reprove them; though I did it at
      first with all the calmness, temper, and good manners that I
      could, which for a while they insulted me the more for thinking
      it had been in fear of their resentment, though afterwards they
      found the contrary.

      I went home, indeed, grieved and afflicted in my mind at the
      abominable wickedness of those men, not doubting, however, that
      they would be made dreadful examples of God’s justice; for I
      looked upon this dismal time to be a particular season of Divine
      vengeance, and that God would on this occasion single out the
      proper objects of His displeasure in a more especial and
      remarkable manner than at another time; and that though I did
      believe that many good people would, and did, fall in the common
      calamity, and that it was no certain rule to judge of the eternal
      state of any one by their being distinguished in such a time of
      general destruction neither one way or other; yet, I say, it
      could not but seem reasonable to believe that God would not think
      fit to spare by His mercy such open declared enemies, that should
      insult His name and Being, defy His vengeance, and mock at His
      worship and worshippers at such a time; no, not though His mercy
      had thought fit to bear with and spare them at other times; that
      this was a day of visitation, a day of God’s anger, and those
      words came into my thought, Jer. v. 9: ‘Shall I not visit for
      these things? saith the Lord: and shall not My soul be avenged of
      such a nation as this?’

      These things, I say, lay upon my mind, and I went home very much
      grieved and oppressed with the horror of these men’s wickedness,
      and to think that anything could be so vile, so hardened, and
      notoriously wicked as to insult God, and His servants, and His
      worship in such a manner, and at such a time as this was, when He
      had, as it were, His sword drawn in His hand on purpose to take
      vengeance not on them only, but on the whole nation.

      I had, indeed, been in some passion at first with them—though it
      was really raised, not by any affront they had offered me
      personally, but by the horror their blaspheming tongues filled me
      with. However, I was doubtful in my thoughts whether the
      resentment I retained was not all upon my own private account,
      for they had given me a great deal of ill language too—I mean
      personally; but after some pause, and having a weight of grief
      upon my mind, I retired myself as soon as I came home, for I
      slept not that night; and giving God most humble thanks for my
      preservation in the eminent danger I had been in, I set my mind
      seriously and with the utmost earnestness to pray for those
      desperate wretches, that God would pardon them, open their eyes,
      and effectually humble them.

      By this I not only did my duty, namely, to pray for those who
      despitefully used me, but I fully tried my own heart, to my full
      satisfaction, that it was not filled with any spirit of
      resentment as they had offended me in particular; and I humbly
      recommend the method to all those that would know, or be certain,
      how to distinguish between their zeal for the honour of God and
      the effects of their private passions and resentment.

      But I must go back here to the particular incidents which occur
      to my thoughts of the time of the visitation, and particularly to
      the time of their shutting up houses in the first part of their
      sickness; for before the sickness was come to its height people
      had more room to make their observations than they had afterward;
      but when it was in the extremity there was no such thing as
      communication with one another, as before.

      During the shutting up of houses, as I have said, some violence
      was offered to the watchmen. As to soldiers, there were none to
      be found. The few guards which the king then had, which were
      nothing like the number entertained since, were dispersed, either
      at Oxford with the Court, or in quarters in the remoter parts of
      the country, small detachments excepted, who did duty at the
      Tower and at Whitehall, and these but very few. Neither am I
      positive that there was any other guard at the Tower than the
      warders, as they called them, who stand at the gate with gowns
      and caps, the same as the yeomen of the guard, except the
      ordinary gunners, who were twenty-four, and the officers
      appointed to look after the magazine, who were called armourers.
      As to trained bands, there was no possibility of raising any;
      neither, if the Lieutenancy, either of London or Middlesex, had
      ordered the drums to beat for the militia, would any of the
      companies, I believe, have drawn together, whatever risk they had
      run.

      This made the watchmen be the less regarded, and perhaps
      occasioned the greater violence to be used against them. I
      mention it on this score to observe that the setting watchmen
      thus to keep the people in was, first of all, not effectual, but
      that the people broke out, whether by force or by stratagem, even
      almost as often as they pleased; and, second, that those that did
      thus break out were generally people infected who, in their
      desperation, running about from one place to another, valued not
      whom they injured: and which perhaps, as I have said, might give
      birth to report that it was natural to the infected people to
      desire to infect others, which report was really false.

      And I know it so well, and in so many several cases, that I could
      give several relations of good, pious, and religious people who,
      when they have had the distemper, have been so far from being
      forward to infect others that they have forbid their own family
      to come near them, in hopes of their being preserved, and have
      even died without seeing their nearest relations lest they should
      be instrumental to give them the distemper, and infect or
      endanger them. If, then, there were cases wherein the infected
      people were careless of the injury they did to others, this was
      certainly one of them, if not the chief, namely, when people who
      had the distemper had broken out from houses which were so shut
      up, and having been driven to extremities for provision or for
      entertainment, had endeavoured to conceal their condition, and
      have been thereby instrumental involuntarily to infect others who
      have been ignorant and unwary.

      This is one of the reasons why I believed then, and do believe
      still, that the shutting up houses thus by force, and
      restraining, or rather imprisoning, people in their own houses,
      as I said above, was of little or no service in the whole. Nay, I
      am of opinion it was rather hurtful, having forced those
      desperate people to wander abroad with the plague upon them, who
      would otherwise have died quietly in their beds.

      I remember one citizen who, having thus broken out of his house
      in Aldersgate Street or thereabout, went along the road to
      Islington; he attempted to have gone in at the Angel Inn, and
      after that the White Horse, two inns known still by the same
      signs, but was refused; after which he came to the Pied Bull, an
      inn also still continuing the same sign. He asked them for
      lodging for one night only, pretending to be going into
      Lincolnshire, and assuring them of his being very sound and free
      from the infection, which also at that time had not reached much
      that way.

      They told him they had no lodging that they could spare but one
      bed up in the garret, and that they could spare that bed for one
      night, some drovers being expected the next day with cattle; so,
      if he would accept of that lodging, he might have it, which he
      did. So a servant was sent up with a candle with him to show him
      the room. He was very well dressed, and looked like a person not
      used to lie in a garret; and when he came to the room he fetched
      a deep sigh, and said to the servant, ‘I have seldom lain in such
      a lodging as this. ‘However, the servant assuring him again that
      they had no better, ‘Well,’ says he, ‘I must make shift; this is
      a dreadful time; but it is but for one night.’ So he sat down
      upon the bedside, and bade the maid, I think it was, fetch him up
      a pint of warm ale. Accordingly the servant went for the ale, but
      some hurry in the house, which perhaps employed her other ways,
      put it out of her head, and she went up no more to him.

      The next morning, seeing no appearance of the gentleman, somebody
      in the house asked the servant that had showed him upstairs what
      was become of him. She started. ‘Alas I,’ says she, ‘I never
      thought more of him. He bade me carry him some warm ale, but I
      forgot.’ Upon which, not the maid, but some other person was sent
      up to see after him, who, coming into the room, found him stark
      dead and almost cold, stretched out across the bed. His clothes
      were pulled off, his jaw fallen, his eyes open in a most
      frightful posture, the rug of the bed being grasped hard in one
      of his hands, so that it was plain he died soon after the maid
      left him; and ’tis probable, had she gone up with the ale, she
      had found him dead in a few minutes after he sat down upon the
      bed. The alarm was great in the house, as anyone may suppose,
      they having been free from the distemper till that disaster,
      which, bringing the infection to the house, spread it immediately
      to other houses round about it. I do not remember how many died
      in the house itself, but I think the maid-servant who went up
      first with him fell presently ill by the fright, and several
      others; for, whereas there died but two in Islington of the
      plague the week before, there died seventeen the week after,
      whereof fourteen were of the plague. This was in the week from
      the 11th of July to the 18th.

      There was one shift that some families had, and that not a few,
      when their houses happened to be infected, and that was this: the
      families who, in the first breaking-out of the distemper, fled
      away into the country and had retreats among their friends,
      generally found some or other of their neighbours or relations to
      commit the charge of those houses to for the safety of the goods
      and the like. Some houses were, indeed, entirely locked up, the
      doors padlocked, the windows and doors having deal boards nailed
      over them, and only the inspection of them committed to the
      ordinary watchmen and parish officers; but these were but few.

      It was thought that there were not less than 10,000 houses
      forsaken of the inhabitants in the city and suburbs, including
      what was in the out-parishes and in Surrey, or the side of the
      water they called Southwark. This was besides the numbers of
      lodgers, and of particular persons who were fled out of other
      families; so that in all it was computed that about 200,000
      people were fled and gone. But of this I shall speak again. But I
      mention it here on this account, namely, that it was a rule with
      those who had thus two houses in their keeping or care, that if
      anybody was taken sick in a family, before the master of the
      family let the examiners or any other officer know of it, he
      immediately would send all the rest of his family, whether
      children or servants, as it fell out to be, to such other house
      which he had so in charge, and then giving notice of the sick
      person to the examiner, have a nurse or nurses appointed, and
      have another person to be shut up in the house with them (which
      many for money would do), so to take charge of the house in case
      the person should die.

      This was, in many cases, the saving a whole family, who, if they
      had been shut up with the sick person, would inevitably have
      perished. But, on the other hand, this was another of the
      inconveniences of shutting up houses; for the apprehensions and
      terror of being shut up made many run away with the rest of the
      family, who, though it was not publicly known, and they were not
      quite sick, had yet the distemper upon them; and who, by having
      an uninterrupted liberty to go about, but being obliged still to
      conceal their circumstances, or perhaps not knowing it
      themselves, gave the distemper to others, and spread the
      infection in a dreadful manner, as I shall explain further
      hereafter.

      And here I may be able to make an observation or two of my own,
      which may be of use hereafter to those into whose hands these may
      come, if they should ever see the like dreadful visitation. (1)
      The infection generally came into the houses of the citizens by
      the means of their servants, whom they were obliged to send up
      and down the streets for necessaries; that is to say, for food or
      physic, to bakehouses, brew-houses, shops, &c.; and who going
      necessarily through the streets into shops, markets, and the
      like, it was impossible but that they should, one way or other,
      meet with distempered people, who conveyed the fatal breath into
      them, and they brought it home to the families to which they
      belonged. (2) It was a great mistake that such a great city as
      this had but one pest-house; for had there been, instead of one
      pest-house—viz., beyond Bunhill Fields, where, at most, they
      could receive, perhaps, two hundred or three hundred people—I
      say, had there, instead of that one, been several pest-houses,
      every one able to contain a thousand people, without lying two in
      a bed, or two beds in a room; and had every master of a family,
      as soon as any servant especially had been taken sick in his
      house, been obliged to send them to the next pest-house, if they
      were willing, as many were, and had the examiners done the like
      among the poor people when any had been stricken with the
      infection; I say, had this been done where the people were
      willing (not otherwise), and the houses not been shut, I am
      persuaded, and was all the while of that opinion, that not so
      many, by several thousands, had died; for it was observed, and I
      could give several instances within the compass of my own
      knowledge, where a servant had been taken sick, and the family
      had either time to send him out or retire from the house and
      leave the sick person, as I have said above, they had all been
      preserved; whereas when, upon one or more sickening in a family,
      the house has been shut up, the whole family have perished, and
      the bearers been obliged to go in to fetch out the dead bodies,
      not being able to bring them to the door, and at last none left
      to do it.

      (3) This put it out of question to me, that the calamity was
      spread by infection; that is to say, by some certain steams or
      fumes, which the physicians call effluvia, by the breath, or by
      the sweat, or by the stench of the sores of the sick persons, or
      some other way, perhaps, beyond even the reach of the physicians
      themselves, which effluvia affected the sound who came within
      certain distances of the sick, immediately penetrating the vital
      parts of the said sound persons, putting their blood into an
      immediate ferment, and agitating their spirits to that degree
      which it was found they were agitated; and so those newly
      infected persons communicated it in the same manner to others.
      And this I shall give some instances of, that cannot but convince
      those who seriously consider it; and I cannot but with some
      wonder find some people, now the contagion is over, talk of its
      being an immediate stroke from Heaven, without the agency of
      means, having commission to strike this and that particular
      person, and none other—which I look upon with contempt as the
      effect of manifest ignorance and enthusiasm; likewise the opinion
      of others, who talk of infection being carried on by the air
      only, by carrying with it vast numbers of insects and invisible
      creatures, who enter into the body with the breath, or even at
      the pores with the air, and there generate or emit most acute
      poisons, or poisonous ovae or eggs, which mingle themselves with
      the blood, and so infect the body: a discourse full of learned
      simplicity, and manifested to be so by universal experience; but
      I shall say more to this case in its order.

      I must here take further notice that nothing was more fatal to
      the inhabitants of this city than the supine negligence of the
      people themselves, who, during the long notice or warning they
      had of the visitation, made no provision for it by laying in
      store of provisions, or of other necessaries, by which they might
      have lived retired and within their own houses, as I have
      observed others did, and who were in a great measure preserved by
      that caution; nor were they, after they were a little hardened to
      it, so shy of conversing with one another, when actually
      infected, as they were at first: no, though they knew it.

      I acknowledge I was one of those thoughtless ones that had made
      so little provision that my servants were obliged to go out of
      doors to buy every trifle by penny and halfpenny, just as before
      it began, even till my experience showing me the folly, I began
      to be wiser so late that I had scarce time to store myself
      sufficient for our common subsistence for a month.

      I had in family only an ancient woman that managed the house, a
      maid-servant, two apprentices, and myself; and the plague
      beginning to increase about us, I had many sad thoughts about
      what course I should take, and how I should act. The many dismal
      objects which happened everywhere as I went about the streets,
      had filled my mind with a great deal of horror for fear of the
      distemper, which was indeed very horrible in itself, and in some
      more than in others. The swellings, which were generally in the
      neck or groin, when they grew hard and would not break, grew so
      painful that it was equal to the most exquisite torture; and
      some, not able to bear the torment, threw themselves out at
      windows or shot themselves, or otherwise made themselves away,
      and I saw several dismal objects of that kind. Others, unable to
      contain themselves, vented their pain by incessant roarings, and
      such loud and lamentable cries were to be heard as we walked
      along the streets that would pierce the very heart to think of,
      especially when it was to be considered that the same dreadful
      scourge might be expected every moment to seize upon ourselves.

      I cannot say but that now I began to faint in my resolutions; my
      heart failed me very much, and sorely I repented of my rashness.
      When I had been out, and met with such terrible things as these I
      have talked of, I say I repented my rashness in venturing to
      abide in town. I wished often that I had not taken upon me to
      stay, but had gone away with my brother and his family.

      Terrified by those frightful objects, I would retire home
      sometimes and resolve to go out no more; and perhaps I would keep
      those resolutions for three or four days, which time I spent in
      the most serious thankfulness for my preservation and the
      preservation of my family, and the constant confession of my
      sins, giving myself up to God every day, and applying to Him with
      fasting, humiliation, and meditation. Such intervals as I had I
      employed in reading books and in writing down my memorandums of
      what occurred to me every day, and out of which afterwards I took
      most of this work, as it relates to my observations without
      doors. What I wrote of my private meditations I reserve for
      private use, and desire it may not be made public on any account
      whatever.

      I also wrote other meditations upon divine subjects, such as
      occurred to me at that time and were profitable to myself, but
      not fit for any other view, and therefore I say no more of that.

      I had a very good friend, a physician, whose name was Heath, whom
      I frequently visited during this dismal time, and to whose advice
      I was very much obliged for many things which he directed me to
      take, by way of preventing the infection when I went out, as he
      found I frequently did, and to hold in my mouth when I was in the
      streets. He also came very often to see me, and as he was a good
      Christian as well as a good physician, his agreeable conversation
      was a very great support to me in the worst of this terrible
      time.

      It was now the beginning of August, and the plague grew very
      violent and terrible in the place where I lived, and Dr Heath
      coming to visit me, and finding that I ventured so often out in
      the streets, earnestly persuaded me to lock myself up and my
      family, and not to suffer any of us to go out of doors; to keep
      all our windows fast, shutters and curtains close, and never to
      open them; but first, to make a very strong smoke in the room
      where the window or door was to be opened, with rozen and pitch,
      brimstone or gunpowder and the like; and we did this for some
      time; but as I had not laid in a store of provision for such a
      retreat, it was impossible that we could keep within doors
      entirely. However, I attempted, though it was so very late, to do
      something towards it; and first, as I had convenience both for
      brewing and baking, I went and bought two sacks of meal, and for
      several weeks, having an oven, we baked all our own bread; also I
      bought malt, and brewed as much beer as all the casks I had would
      hold, and which seemed enough to serve my house for five or six
      weeks; also I laid in a quantity of salt butter and Cheshire
      cheese; but I had no flesh-meat, and the plague raged so
      violently among the butchers and slaughter-houses on the other
      side of our street, where they are known to dwell in great
      numbers, that it was not advisable so much as to go over the
      street among them.

      And here I must observe again, that this necessity of going out
      of our houses to buy provisions was in a great measure the ruin
      of the whole city, for the people catched the distemper on these
      occasions one of another, and even the provisions themselves were
      often tainted; at least I have great reason to believe so; and
      therefore I cannot say with satisfaction what I know is repeated
      with great assurance, that the market-people and such as brought
      provisions to town were never infected. I am certain the butchers
      of Whitechappel, where the greatest part of the flesh-meat was
      killed, were dreadfully visited, and that at least to such a
      degree that few of their shops were kept open, and those that
      remained of them killed their meat at Mile End and that way, and
      brought it to market upon horses.

      However, the poor people could not lay up provisions, and there
      was a necessity that they must go to market to buy, and others to
      send servants or their children; and as this was a necessity
      which renewed itself daily, it brought abundance of unsound
      people to the markets, and a great many that went thither sound
      brought death home with them.

      It is true people used all possible precaution. When any one
      bought a joint of meat in the market they would not take it off
      the butcher’s hand, but took it off the hooks themselves. On the
      other hand, the butcher would not touch the money, but have it
      put into a pot full of vinegar, which he kept for that purpose.
      The buyer carried always small money to make up any odd sum, that
      they might take no change. They carried bottles of scents and
      perfumes in their hands, and all the means that could be used
      were used, but then the poor could not do even these things, and
      they went at all hazards.

      Innumerable dismal stories we heard every day on this very
      account. Sometimes a man or woman dropped down dead in the very
      markets, for many people that had the plague upon them knew
      nothing of it till the inward gangrene had affected their vitals,
      and they died in a few moments. This caused that many died
      frequently in that manner in the streets suddenly, without any
      warning; others perhaps had time to go to the next bulk or stall,
      or to any door-porch, and just sit down and die, as I have said
      before.

      These objects were so frequent in the streets that when the
      plague came to be very raging on one side, there was scarce any
      passing by the streets but that several dead bodies would be
      lying here and there upon the ground. On the other hand, it is
      observable that though at first the people would stop as they
      went along and call to the neighbours to come out on such an
      occasion, yet afterward no notice was taken of them; but that if
      at any time we found a corpse lying, go across the way and not
      come near it; or, if in a narrow lane or passage, go back again
      and seek some other way to go on the business we were upon; and
      in those cases the corpse was always left till the officers had
      notice to come and take them away, or till night, when the
      bearers attending the dead-cart would take them up and carry them
      away. Nor did those undaunted creatures who performed these
      offices fail to search their pockets, and sometimes strip off
      their clothes if they were well dressed, as sometimes they were,
      and carry off what they could get.

      But to return to the markets. The butchers took that care that if
      any person died in the market they had the officers always at
      hand to take them up upon hand-barrows and carry them to the next
      churchyard; and this was so frequent that such were not entered
      in the weekly bill, ‘Found dead in the streets or fields’, as is
      the case now, but they went into the general articles of the
      great distemper.

      But now the fury of the distemper increased to such a degree that
      even the markets were but very thinly furnished with provisions
      or frequented with buyers compared to what they were before; and
      the Lord Mayor caused the country people who brought provisions
      to be stopped in the streets leading into the town, and to sit
      down there with their goods, where they sold what they brought,
      and went immediately away; and this encouraged the country people
      greatly-to do so, for they sold their provisions at the very
      entrances into the town, and even in the fields, as particularly
      in the fields beyond Whitechappel, in Spittlefields; also in St
      George’s Fields in Southwark, in Bunhill Fields, and in a great
      field called Wood’s Close, near Islington. Thither the Lord
      Mayor, aldermen, and magistrates sent their officers and servants
      to buy for their families, themselves keeping within doors as
      much as possible, and the like did many other people; and after
      this method was taken the country people came with great
      cheerfulness, and brought provisions of all sorts, and very
      seldom got any harm, which, I suppose, added also to that report
      of their being miraculously preserved.

      As for my little family, having thus, as I have said, laid in a
      store of bread, butter, cheese, and beer, I took my friend and
      physician’s advice, and locked myself up, and my family, and
      resolved to suffer the hardship of living a few months without
      flesh-meat, rather than to purchase it at the hazard of our
      lives.

      But though I confined my family, I could not prevail upon my
      unsatisfied curiosity to stay within entirely myself; and though
      I generally came frighted and terrified home, yet I could not
      restrain; only that indeed I did not do it so frequently as at
      first.

      I had some little obligations, indeed, upon me to go to my
      brother’s house, which was in Coleman Street parish and which he
      had left to my care, and I went at first every day, but
      afterwards only once or twice a week.

      In these walks I had many dismal scenes before my eyes, as
      particularly of persons falling dead in the streets, terrible
      shrieks and screechings of women, who, in their agonies, would
      throw open their chamber windows and cry out in a dismal,
      surprising manner. It is impossible to describe the variety of
      postures in which the passions of the poor people would express
      themselves.

      Passing through Tokenhouse Yard, in Lothbury, of a sudden a
      casement violently opened just over my head, and a woman gave
      three frightful screeches, and then cried, ‘Oh! death, death,
      death!’ in a most inimitable tone, and which struck me with
      horror and a chillness in my very blood. There was nobody to be
      seen in the whole street, neither did any other window open, for
      people had no curiosity now in any case, nor could anybody help
      one another, so I went on to pass into Bell Alley.

      Just in Bell Alley, on the right hand of the passage, there was a
      more terrible cry than that, though it was not so directed out at
      the window; but the whole family was in a terrible fright, and I
      could hear women and children run screaming about the rooms like
      distracted, when a garret-window opened and somebody from a
      window on the other side the alley called and asked, ‘What is the
      matter?’ upon which, from the first window, it was answered, ‘Oh
      Lord, my old master has hanged himself!’ The other asked again,
      ‘Is he quite dead?’ and the first answered, ‘Ay, ay, quite dead;
      quite dead and cold!’ This person was a merchant and a deputy
      alderman, and very rich. I care not to mention the name, though I
      knew his name too, but that would be an hardship to the family,
      which is now flourishing again.

      But this is but one; it is scarce credible what dreadful cases
      happened in particular families every day. People in the rage of
      the distemper, or in the torment of their swellings, which was
      indeed intolerable, running out of their own government, raving
      and distracted, and oftentimes laying violent hands upon
      themselves, throwing themselves out at their windows, shooting
      themselves &c.; mothers murdering their own children in their
      lunacy, some dying of mere grief as a passion, some of mere
      fright and surprise without any infection at all, others frighted
      into idiotism and foolish distractions, some into despair and
      lunacy, others into melancholy madness.

      The pain of the swelling was in particular very violent, and to
      some intolerable; the physicians and surgeons may be said to have
      tortured many poor creatures even to death. The swellings in some
      grew hard, and they applied violent drawing-plaisters or
      poultices to break them, and if these did not do they cut and
      scarified them in a terrible manner. In some those swellings were
      made hard partly by the force of the distemper and partly by
      their being too violently drawn, and were so hard that no
      instrument could cut them, and then they burnt them with
      caustics, so that many died raving mad with the torment, and some
      in the very operation. In these distresses, some, for want of
      help to hold them down in their beds, or to look to them, laid
      hands upon themselves as above. Some broke out into the streets,
      perhaps naked, and would run directly down to the river if they
      were not stopped by the watchman or other officers, and plunge
      themselves into the water wherever they found it.

      It often pierced my very soul to hear the groans and cries of
      those who were thus tormented, but of the two this was counted
      the most promising particular in the whole infection, for if
      these swellings could be brought to a head, and to break and run,
      or, as the surgeons call it, to digest, the patient generally
      recovered; whereas those who, like the gentlewoman’s daughter,
      were struck with death at the beginning, and had the tokens come
      out upon them, often went about indifferent easy till a little
      before they died, and some till the moment they dropped down, as
      in apoplexies and epilepsies is often the case. Such would be
      taken suddenly very sick, and would run to a bench or bulk, or
      any convenient place that offered itself, or to their own houses
      if possible, as I mentioned before, and there sit down, grow
      faint, and die. This kind of dying was much the same as it was
      with those who die of common mortifications, who die swooning,
      and, as it were, go away in a dream. Such as died thus had very
      little notice of their being infected at all till the gangrene
      was spread through their whole body; nor could physicians
      themselves know certainly how it was with them till they opened
      their breasts or other parts of their body and saw the tokens.

      We had at this time a great many frightful stories told us of
      nurses and watchmen who looked after the dying people; that is to
      say, hired nurses who attended infected people, using them
      barbarously, starving them, smothering them, or by other wicked
      means hastening their end, that is to say, murdering of them; and
      watchmen, being set to guard houses that were shut up when there
      has been but one person left, and perhaps that one lying sick,
      that they have broke in and murdered that body, and immediately
      thrown them out into the dead-cart! And so they have gone scarce
      cold to the grave.

      I cannot say but that some such murders were committed, and I
      think two were sent to prison for it, but died before they could
      be tried; and I have heard that three others, at several times,
      were excused for murders of that kind; but I must say I believe
      nothing of its being so common a crime as some have since been
      pleased to say, nor did it seem to be so rational where the
      people were brought so low as not to be able to help themselves,
      for such seldom recovered, and there was no temptation to commit
      a murder, at least none equal to the fact, where they were sure
      persons would die in so short a time, and could not live.

      That there were a great many robberies and wicked practices
      committed even in this dreadful time I do not deny. The power of
      avarice was so strong in some that they would run any hazard to
      steal and to plunder; and particularly in houses where all the
      families or inhabitants have been dead and carried out, they
      would break in at all hazards, and without regard to the danger
      of infection, take even the clothes off the dead bodies and the
      bed-clothes from others where they lay dead.

      This, I suppose, must be the case of a family in Houndsditch,
      where a man and his daughter, the rest of the family being, as I
      suppose, carried away before by the dead-cart, were found stark
      naked, one in one chamber and one in another, lying dead on the
      floor, and the clothes of the beds, from whence ’tis supposed
      they were rolled off by thieves, stolen and carried quite away.

      It is indeed to be obs